Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10827-025-00914-5

RESEARCH

Differential temporal filtering in the fly optic lobe
Alexander Borst1
Received: 19 May 2025 / Revised: 13 August 2025 / Accepted: 16 August 2025 / Published online: 26 September 2025
© The Author(s) 2025

Abstract
Visual interneurons come in many different flavors, representing luminance changes at one location as ON or OFF
signals with different dynamics, ranging from purely sustained to sharply transient responses. While the functional relevance of this representation for subsequent computations like direction-selective motion detection is well understood,
the mechanisms by which these differences in dynamics arise are unclear. Here, I study this question in the fly optic lobe.
Taking advantage of the known connectome I simulate a network of five adjacent optical columns each comprising 65
different cell types. Each neuron is modeled as an electrically compact single compartment, conductance-based element
that receives input from other neurons within its column and from its neighboring columns according to the intra- and
inter-columnar connectivity matrix. The sign of the input is determined according to the known transmitter type of the
presynaptic neuron and the receptor on the postsynaptic side. In addition, some of the neurons are given voltage-dependent
conductances known from the fly transcriptome. As free parameters, each neuron has an input and an output gain, applied
to all its input and output synapses, respectively. The parameters are adjusted such that the spatio-temporal receptive field
properties of 13 out of the 65 simulated neurons match the experimentally determined ones as closely as possible. Despite
the fact that all neurons have identical leak conductance and membrane capacitance, this procedure leads to a surprisingly
good fit to the data, where specific neurons respond transiently while others respond in a sustained way to luminance
changes. This fit critically depends on the presence of an H-current in some of the first-order interneurons, i.e., lamina
cells L1 and L2: turning off the H-current eliminates the transient response nature of many neurons leaving only sustained
responses in all of the examined interneurons. I conclude that the diverse dynamic response behavior of the columnar
neurons in the fly optic lobe starts in the lamina and is created by their different intrinsic membrane properties. I predict
that eliminating the hyperpolarization-activated current by RNAi should strongly affect the dynamics of many medulla
neurons and, consequently, also higher-order functions depending on them like direction-selectivity in T4 and T5 neurons.
Keywords Visual system – connectome · Neural dynamics · Biophysics

1 Introduction
Luminance information represented by the activity pattern
of the photoreceptors is processed in subsequent neuropil
layers in many different parallel channels. As a result, visual
interneurons come in a variety of different flavors along various dimensions: Cells can be classified as ON or OFF cells

Action Editor: Gaute Einevoll
Alexander Borst
alexander.borst@bi.mpg.de
1

Max Planck Institute for Biological Intelligence, Martinsried,
Germany

depending on their contrast polarity preference, cells can differ in their receptive field size with more or less pronounced
antagonistic surrounds, and cells can be called sustained or
transient, depending on their response time course. A telling
example comes from the mouse retina where bipolar cells
projecting to different adjacent layers in the inner retina
smoothly vary from OFF sustained to OFF transient and ON
transient to ON sustained in a systematic way (Baden et al.,
2013). In a similar way, visual interneurons in the fly optic
lobe are either ON or OFF cells (Joesch et al., 2010; Strother
et al., 2014) and respond to luminance changes in a transient
or sustained way (Fig. 1, modified from Borst et al., 2020a,
b; see also Strother et al., 2014; Behnia et al., 2014; Kohn
et al., 2021). Differential temporal filtering of retinal inputs
is important for subsequent computations like visual motion

13

508

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

Fig. 1 Linear receptive fields of columnar neurons obtained by reverse
correlation from calcium responses to stochastic stimuli in tethered
fruit flies. (A) Schematic of the circuit including all columnar neurons presynaptic of T4 and T5, which have been characterized (graphics from Drews et al., 2020). ON-pathway neurons are shown in red,
OFF-pathway neurons in blue, lamina neurons in green. (B) Results
for lamina columnar neurons L1–5. Top: False-color plot of the linear

spatial receptive fields from a Difference-of-Gaussian model fit to the
original data. Middle: 1D spatial profile of the receptive field. Bottom:
Step responses of the cells (data replotted from Drews et al., 2020). (C)
Same as in B for columnar elements of the ON-pathway, Mi1, Tm3,
Mi4 and Mi9. (D) Same as in B for columnar elements of the OFFpathway, Tm1, Tm2, Tm4 and Tm9 (data in C and D replotted from
Arenz et al. (2017), and from Drews et al. (2020)

detection which requires an interaction of a delayed signal
from one retinal location with an un-delayed signal from
an adjacent retinal location (Kim et al., 2014; Groschner et
al., 2022; Borst & Groschner, 2023). However, the mechanism by which such differences in temporal properties arise

is unclear, in the vertebrate retina as well as in the fly optic
lobe.
In principle, the temporal dynamics of a neuron’s
response to a sensory stimulus are shaped by its intrinsic
membrane properties as well as by its input signal. Intrinsic

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

membrane properties comprise passive properties, i.e.,
membrane leak conductance and membrane capacitance,
and active properties, i.e., voltage-dependent conductances
for various ions. The input signal may consist of the primary
sensory receptor output signal, in case it is directly postsynaptic to the sensory receptor cell, as well as the output
signals of all other neurons it is connected to it. In the latter case, one may distinguish between a pure feed-forward
chain and recurrent feed-back connectivity. In general, thus,
the neural response time-constants are a combination of the
intrinsic time-constants and the connectivity which can lead
to response time-constants exceeding by far the ones of any
individual neuron in the network (Dayan & Abbott, 2001;
Borst & Leibold, 2023). Given the wealth of information
available for neurons in the fly optic lobe, which includes
the connectome (Dorkenwald et al., 2024), the transcriptome (Davis et al., 2020) and physiological recording data
from either calcium-imaging or patch-clamp experiments, I
decided to investigate the mechanistic origin of differential
temporal filtering by modeling the network of optic-lobe
neurons with biophysically plausible, conductance-based
elements. Adjusting the input and the output gain of each
neuron such that a subset of neurons (those where experimental data exist) matches the response kinetics of their real
counterparts, I identify a particular voltage-gated ion channel present in some of the first-order interneurons as being
critical for the transient response behavior of postsynaptic
neurons. I conclude that transient behavior of most secondorder interneurons is not created by feed-back loops but
rather inherited from first-order interneurons.

2 Methods
2.1 Model
Each neuron i was modeled as an electrically compact single-compartment, conductance-based graded element, using
the following, first-order differential equation:
−Cm dVdti (t)
(Vi

= (Vi (t) − Eexc ) gexc,i (t) + (Vi (t) − Einh ) ginh,i (t) +
(t) − Eleak,i ) gleak + (Vi (t) − EIh ) gh,i ( Vi (t))

This equation states that the sum of five different currents equals zero. The first one is the capacitive current
−Cm dVdti (t) . The next two terms, (Vi (t) − Eexc ) gexc,i (t),
and (Vi (t) − Einh ) ginh,i (t) describe the excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic currents. The excitatory and inhibitory reversal potentials were set to Eexc = +10 mV and
Einh = −70 mV .The overall connectivity matrix M (Shinomiya et al., 2019) was split into an excitatory and an
inhibitory matrix, Mexc and Minh, respectively, containing
non-negative entries only. The total excitatory and inhibitory

509

conductance of each neuron i was then calculated as the
sum over all its inputs, weighted by the synaptic strength as
derived from the two connectivity matrices:
gexc,i (t) = inp_gaini
ginh,i (t) = inp_gaini

∑

∑

j=N
j=1 M exc,i,j out_gainj

[Vj (t) − trld]+

j=N
j=1 M inh,i,j out_gainj

[Vj (t) − trld]+

The output of each neuron j was rectified with respect to
a constant threshold ('trld') set to -50 mV. As is seen from
the above equations, two parameters come into play here:
the input gain of neuron i and the output gain of neuron j.
By applying the output gain of a neuron uniformly to all its
postsynaptic downstream neurons, and the input gain to all
its presynaptic input neurons, the relative strength of connectivity as set by the number of synapses determined in the
EM was preserved. The next term is (Vi (t) − Eleak,i ) gleak ,
which describes the ohmic leak current. Eleak was set to -50
mV for all neurons in the circuit, except for lamina cells
L1-L3 where Eleak was set to -20 mV. Importantly, all neurons were given the same capacitance and leak conductance, and, thus had uniform intrinsic passive membrane
properties. Their values amounted to Cm = 40 pF and
gleak = 1 nS , resulting in a membrane time-constant
of 40 ms for an electrically passive neuron isolated from
all synaptic input. The last term in membrane equation,
(Vi (t) − EIh ) gh,i ( Vi (t)), describes an active, i.e., voltage-dependent, H-current. The gene encoding the underlying ion channel HCN is highly expressed in lamina cells L1,
L2 and L5 (Davis et al., 2020). In part of the model simulations, this current was inserted into the five lamina cells, in
other simulations it was not. I modeled the H-current by two
functions, its steady-state activation characteristic gh,∞ ,
and its voltage-dependent time-constant (McCormick et al.,
1992). The first was defined as a logistic function, involving
the parameters maximum conductance gmax , the voltage of
half-maximum steady-state activation Vmid , and the slope
of the curve at this point, i.e., slope:
gh,∞ = gmax

1
1 + e(Vmid −V )· slope

The voltage-dependent time-constant was defined by the
following equation, involving one parameter, τ midV :
τ =

1.5
+ 0.1
e(τ midV −V )· 0.1 + e−(τ midV −V )· 0.1

The conductance of the H-current in neuron i at each time
was obtained from numerical integration of the following
1 st -oder differential equation at a temporal resolution of
10 ms:

13

510

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520
Fig. 2 Layout of network model. (A) Schematic of the circuit. Five
adjacent coluwmns, arranged in a linear way, were simulated. (B)
Intra-columnar connectivity matrix containing the synaptic weights
between all 65 columnar elements. (C) Same as B, but for inter-columnar connectivity. (D) Resulting overall connectivity matrix for all 325
network elements. Data from (Shinomiya et al., 2019) split into intraand inter-columnar connectivity by Janna Lappalainen

dg h,i ( Vi (t))
1
=
(gh,∞ − gh,i ( Vi (t)))
dt
τ

With 65 different neuron types and each neuron having an input and an output gain, the total number of
free parameters, thus, amounted to 130. If the model
incorporated an H-current, 8 additional parameters
g( max (L1) , g max (L2)
g max
(L3) , g max (L4)
g max
(L5) , Vmid,
,
,
slope, τ midV ) were used, so total number of free parameters increased to 138.
To determine the spatio-temporal receptive field properties of the model neurons, I modeled a linear array of five
adjacent columns. The choice of limiting the simulated network to five columns is based on the fact that the receptive
fields of none of the columnar neurons considered exceeds
30 degrees, i.e. 5 times the receptive field of the photoreceptors providing input to a single column. Since the spatial
receptive fields of the model neurons in the boundary columns are compromised by the lack of lateral input from one
side, I only considered the ones in the central column which
have two neighbors to the left and to the right. To determine
their spatio-temporal receptive field properties, a depolarizing current step was injected into photoreceptors R1 to R8
within the central column, equivalent to a light pulse delivered locally. Instead of moving the stimulus position from
one column to the other and measuring the responses of the
neurons in the central column each time, like one would
do in an experiment, its spread into the other neighboring
columns was used to determine the spatial receptive field
of each neuron type within the central column at 5 different locations. This reduced the computing time by a factor
of 5. The time course of each neuron’s response described
its temporal dynamics over 2 s at a temporal resolution of
10 ms, i.e., in T = 200 time steps. To account for the fact
that experimental data were derived from calcium imaging,
the voltage responses of the model neurons were finally fed
through a 1 st -order low-pass filter with 50 ms time-constant. Model responses were evaluated with respect to the
membrane potential at stimulus onset, which was at t = 0.5 s.
Prior to that, model responses were set to zero.

2.2 Data
Data were taken from two previous studies (Arenz et al.,
2017; Drews et al., 2020). There, the impulse responses of
13 neuronal cell types of the fly optic lobe were determined

511

by calcium imaging, using white noise stimuli and reverse
correlation. These data represented normalized impulse
responses which were integrated over time to result in step
responses and contained no information about membrane
voltage. In order to compare them with simulations producing membrane potential output, I arbitrarily set the maximum of all data to 20 mV response magnitude. To account
for the response characteristics of lamina cells L1 and L2 as
seen in electrophysiological recordings (e.g. Laughlin et al.,
1987), a DC level of 40% of the peak value was added to
their step responses.

2.3 Cost function
Denoting the free parameters as a vector z, the model
responses of N = 13 out of the 65 neuron types were compared to the experimental data set (Fig. 1) by the following
cost function:
cost (z) =

∑

N,X,T
n,x,t (modeln,x,t

2

− datan,x,t ) /

∑

2
N,X,T
n,x,t (datan,x,t )

where N is the number of cell types considered (N = 13),
X the location within the receptive field (X = 5), and T the
number of time points (T = 200). The cost function expresses
the deviation of the model from the data responses as a fraction of the data power and, therefore, allows for a meaningful interpretation.

2.4 Parameter optimization
Optimal parameter sets were found by minimizing the cost
function by gradient descent using the Adam optimizer of
the PyTorch library. Starting from a random parameter set,
the optimizer was applied in three consecutive rounds with
10,000 steps each, decreasing the learning rate from 0.1 to
0.01 to 0.001. This was repeated 20 times, resulting in 20
different models with an H-current, and 20 models without
an H-current. The model with the smallest final cost value is
shown in Fig. 4 (optimized without an H-current) and Fig. 5
(optimized with an H-current). The CPU time of one optimization run with 3 times 10 000 steps was about 25 min.

3 Results
In order to capture the spatial and the temporal properties of
columnar neurons in the fly visual system, I simulated the
neural activity in five adjacent columns arranged in a linear
way (Fig. 2A). Each column contained 65 cell types, each
with identical properties across all columns. The connectivity within each column (Fig. 2B) was set according to connectomic data (Shinomiya et al., 2019) with the strength of

13

512

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520
Fig. 3 Different ways to produce transient responses. (A) Responses of
a 1 st (in red) and of a 2nd order lowpass filter (in blue) to a pulse of 1 s
duration. (B) The unbalanced difference of 1 st and 2nd order signals
leads to a transient hyperpolarization response. (C) Activation characteristic (in blue) and voltage-dependent time-constant (in orange) of
a H-current. (D) Response of a model neuron with an H-current to
a hyperpolarizing current injection. (E) Activation characteristic (in
blue) and time-constant (in orange) of a non-inactivating K-current.
(F) Response of a model neuron with a K-current to a hyperpolarizing
current injection

each connection corresponding to the number of synapses
and the sign based on the known transmitter phenotype of
each cell and its postsynaptic receptor. The connectivity
between neighboring columns (Fig. 2C) was constructed in
the same way, except for L4 cells, whose branches in neighboring columns were assumed to be electrically isolated.
This resulted in a network of 325 neurons with an overall
connectivity combining the intra- and inter-columnar connections (Fig. 2D). While such a linear arrangement of only
five columns might seem limited and somewhat unnatural,
given the 2-dimensional, hexagonal arrangement of about
800 optical columns in the fly, it suffices for the purpose of
the current study which investigates the temporal dynamics of the individual elements based on the connectivity between the neurons within each column and the ones
between neurons in immediate neighboring ones.
I modeled each neuron as a single-compartment, conductance-based, graded-potential element (for details, see
Methods). Each neuron received excitatory and inhibitory
input according to the overall connectivity matrix. Importantly, each neuron type was given two free parameters, an
input and an output gain. By applying the input gain of a
neuron to all its presynaptic input neurons and the output
gain uniformly to all its postsynaptic downstream neurons,
the relative strength of connectivity as set by the connectivity matrix was preserved. All neurons were given the same
capacitance and leak conductance, and, thus, had uniform
intrinsic passive membrane properties. Lamina cells L1-3
are the first neurons postsynaptic to photoreceptors R1-6,
and, therefore, should be important for shaping the response
properties of downstream medulla neurons. L1 and L2 are
known to respond to a light pulse by a transient hyperpolarization with a typical ‘sag’ in the neuron’s membrane
potential, followed by a rebound excitation after the light
has been turned off (Zettler & Straka, 1987; Laughlin et
al., 1987). Such a response can be caused by two different mechanisms: (1) Low-pass filtering the light response
with two different time-constants and taking the difference
between the two outputs (Fig. 3A, B) or by (2) intrinsic,
active membrane properties of the lamina cells (Fig. 3C-F).
In the latter case, the current leading to the response sag
could be a depolarizing current activated by hyperpolarization such as the H-current (Fig. 3C, D), or the deactivation

513

of a hyperpolarizing current, such as a non-inactivating
K-current (Fig. 3E, F). Transcriptomic data indicated a high
expression level of the gene coding for an HCN-channel
(FlyBase ID: FBgn0263397), responsible for an H-current,
in lamina cells L1, L2 and L5 (Davis et al., 2020). I, therefore, incorporated such a current in lamina cells in some
of the simulations. With each neuron type having an input
and an output gain, the total number of free parameters in
the model amounted to 130. If the model incorporated an
H-current, 5 additional parameters were used to describe
the maximum conductances in the five lamina cells and 3
parameters to characterize the voltage-dependence of the
H-current activation curve and time-constant (for details,
see Methods).
I modeled a linear array of five adjacent columns and
injected a depolarizing current step in photoreceptors R1 to
R8 within the central column, equivalent to a light pulse
delivered locally. Its spread into the other neighboring columns was used to determine the spatial receptive field of
each neuron type in the central column (for details, see
Methods). To account for the fact that experimental data
were derived from calcium imaging, the voltage responses
of the model neurons were finally fed through a 1 st -order
low-pass filter with 50 ms time-constant. To fit the model
responses to the data, an overall error or cost of the model
was defined as the squared difference between data and
model responses divided by the data power. Optimal parameter sets were found by minimizing the cost function by gradient descent starting from a random parameter set.
In a first round of simulations, I investigated to what
extent all the different dynamics of fly visual interneurons
can be accounted for using identical, uniform, passive membrane properties of all model neurons. Thus, the only way to
achieve different response properties is by the network connectivity. The resulting receptive field properties from such
simulations overall matched the experimental data in quite
amazing detail, leading to a final cost of about 7% (Fig. 4).
Importantly, the pronounced antagonistic surround of lamina neuron L3 and medulla neuron Mi4 was well captured
by the model, indicating that inter-columnar connectivities
can account for their spatial receptive field profiles. Furthermore, and of particular interest in the current context,
the transient responses of lamina neurons L1, L2 and L4, as
well as of medullar neurons Mi1, Tm3, Tm1, Tm2 and Tm4
were replicated by the model, together with the sustained
responses of L3, Mi4, Mi9 and Tm9. However, unlike its
biological counterpart, lamina neuron L5 responded in a
sustained way. Furthermore, its response amplitude, as well
as the one of medulla neuron Tm4, fell short of the respective measured amplitudes. As a final note, many responses
showed ringing, indicating some sort of instability within
feed-back loops.

13

514

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520
Fig. 4 Model simulation with electrically passive elements. Responses
of model neurons (in red) with parameters optimized to fit experimental data (in gray). (A) Top: Spatial profiles of the receptive field of
the five lamina cells L1-L5. Bottom: Temporal step response of the
same neurons. (B) Same as A, but for columnar elements of the ONpathway, Mi1, Tm3, Mi4 and Mi9. (C) Same as A, but for columnar
elements of the OFF-pathway, Tm1, Tm2, Tm4 and Tm9

As a second step, I inserted an H-current into lamina neurons and minimized the cost, again starting from a random
parameter set. This time, the model had 5 additional parameters determining the maximum conductance in each of the
5 lamina neurons and 3 parameters describing the voltage
characteristics of the H-current, shared for all 5 lamina
neurons. The resulting receptive field properties of the 13
selected neuron types were in most cases almost indistinguishable from the experimental data, with a final cost of
only 3% (Fig. 5). As in the data, the spatial profiles of the
receptive fields of lamina cell L3 and medulla neuron Mi4
had antagonistic surrounds, and that of medulla cell Tm3
was extending over several columns. The only significant
deviation was seen in medulla neurons Tm3 and Tm4 where
the model responses had a smaller amplitude than the real
neurons. All other cells faithfully matched the data in their
spatial profile as well as in their time-course. Furthermore,
ringing was almost completely absent in the responses. Most
importantly, the distinction between transient and sustained
cells in the model was as clear as in the data.
Next, I investigated to what extent the dynamic properties of this network still depend on the circuit connectivity
or, alternatively, now are largely dependent on the intrinsic, transient membrane properties of lamina neurons L1,
L2, L4 and L5. To this end, I switched off the H-current in
the above network after optimizing the parameters with an
H-current. This procedure led to a dramatic break-down of
the match between model and data, quantified by a cost of
more than 100% (Fig. 6). Importantly, all model neurons
now responded in a sustained way, i.e., have lost their transient nature.
I finally tested the consistency of the above conclusions by comparing the parameter sets of the 10 best models obtained from 20 optimization runs in both scenarios,
i.e., without and with an H-current. Without an H-current,
final model costs ranged from 7% to about 11% (Fig. 7A),
while costs of the 10 best models with an H-current all were
found below 4% (Fig. 7B). This means that introduction of
an H-current led to a cost reduction of about 50%. In each
model category, parameters were highly correlated (Fig. 7C,
D) indicating that different optimization runs converged on
a similar parameter set each time. However, these parameter sets were significantly different for models without and
with an H-current (Fig. 7E, F), with input and output gains
being in general smaller for models without an H-current

515

compared to models with an H-current. Interestingly, despite
the fact that all five lamina cells were given an H-current,
optimization consistently converged on models where only
lamina cells L1 and L2 had a large maximum H-current conductance, a small one in lamina cells L4 and L5, and zero in
lamina cell L3, which is in approximate agreement with the
transcriptomic data of Davis et al. (2020).

4 Discussion
The model simulations presented above show that, in principle, it is possible to replicate the response dynamics of sustained and transient lamina and medulla neurons by using
identical membrane time-constants in all model neurons
(Fig. 4). In this case, all differences are due to the connectivity within the network. However, inserting an H-current
into lamina neurons improved the fit to the data significantly
(Fig. 5). Turning off the H-current then led all neurons to
respond in a sustained way (Fig. 6) emphasizing the critical
role of this current in lamina cells for the overall response
dynamics of the circuit elements in the fly optic lobe.
The approach taken in this study uses data from only 13
out of the 65 cell types simulated in the network. This is
because only from these 13 cell types, data were collected
using an identical stimulus protocol and data evaluation.
On average, the 13 cell types receive 67% of their synaptic
input from cells within this group, including photoreceptors, and 33% from other neurons in the optic lobe. While
there exist data for a couple of other cell types as well in the
literature, still the vast majority of neurons has unknown
response properties making the model presented above
highly under-constrained. Interestingly, however, even with
this high degree of open constrains, the model with homogeneous passive, membrane parameters never reaches the
quality of fit that is obtained by a model with H-currents
in lamina neurons, i.e. by just adding 8 free parameters to
the already existing 130 model parameters. This hints to a
principle limitation of such a model.
The transient hyperpolarization of lamina monopolar cells in response to light stimuli have been known for
long (Zettler & Straka, 1987; Laughlin et al., 1987). It is
caused by a histamine release from fly photoreceptors
opening a chloride conductance (Hardie, 1989). Assuming
a rather constant transmitter release from photoreceptors
during light stimulation, the transient nature of the hyperpolarization in the postsynaptic lamina cells could come
about by an inactivation of the histamine receptor or by a
subsequent depolarizing current. Such a depolarizing current can be caused extrinsically, i.e. through synaptic connectivity with other interneurons, or by an intrinsic current
such as the hyperpolarization-activated H-current (Fig. 3C,

13

516

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520
Fig. 5 Model simulation with H-current in L1, L2 and L5. Responses
of model neurons (in red) with parameters optimized to fit experimental data (in gray). (A) Top: Spatial profiles of the receptive field of
the five lamina cells L1-L5. Bottom: Temporal step response of the
same neurons. (B) Same as A, but for columnar elements of the ONpathway, Mi1, Tm3, Mi4 and Mi9. (C) Same as A, but for columnar
elements of the OFF-pathway, Tm1, Tm2, Tm4 and Tm9

D). Interestingly, the gene encoding for the HCN-channel
underlying an H-current is transcribed in 11 isoforms, one
of which was found to be highly expressed in lamina cells
L1 and L5, at an intermediate level in L2 and L4, and zero in
L3 (Davis et al., 2020). Given the strong electrical coupling
between L1 and L2 (Joesch et al., 2010), this expression pattern is in principle in agreement with the transient response
behavior of L1 and L2 cells on the one, and the sustained
responses of L3 on the other side. However, none of the
HCN-isoforms has so far been characterized in electrophysiological experiments, leaving their specific properties
in the dark and open to parameter adjustment. The optimal
parameters found in the simulations above agree qualitatively with the ones determined for H-currents of thalamic
neurons in vertebrates (McCormick et al., 1992). Interestingly, maximal conductance of this H-current, set as a free
parameter for all 5 lamina cells, was consistently found to
be highest in L1, L2, small in L4 and L5, and zero for L3 in
all simulation runs.
K-channels are another way to change the membrane
conductance and, hence, can influence the membrane timeconstant. Indeed, various K-channels have been shown
to affect the response time-course of Drosophila neurons
(Groschner et al., 2018; Guer et al., 2020). Specifically, two
A-type K-channels - Shaker and Shal – are expressed in L2
and L3 cells, and, when blocked, either pharmacologically
or genetically, lead to somewhat slower responses (Guer et
al., 2020). However, such inactivating K-channels can only
affect the rebound depolarization seen in L1 and L2, but not
the sag in their hyperpolarizing response to light (Rusanen
& Weckstroem, 2016). For the latter, a non-inactivating
K-channel would be required with the resting membrane
potential of the neuron rather hyperpolarized (Fig. 3E, F).
Lamina neurons L1 and L2, however, have a resting potential of around − 38 mV (Zettler & Straka, 1987; Rusanen &
Weckstroem, 2016).
Aside from intrinsic voltage-gated ion channels, synaptic mechanisms like short-term depression on the presynaptic side and receptor desensitization on the postsynaptic
side might as well shape the temporal dynamic of neural
responses, leading to different filter properties of the neural
circuit elements. Such synaptic mechanisms were not considered in this simulation study. In case of lamina cells L1

517

and L2, both short-term depression and receptor desensitization could cause a sag in the hyperpolarizing response,
but would not lead to a rebound depolarization. Aside from
the exact mechanism, high-pass filtering occurring within
the lamina seems to be most critical for the dynamic properties of downstream neurons in the medulla and lobula.
The optic lobe network has recently been modeled by
Lappalainen et al. (2024). Pretty good matches were found
in this study between the various model and real neurons
of the fly optic lobe. The simulation study presented here
differs from that of Lappalainen et al. (2024) in the following four aspects: (1) Lappalainen et al. (2024) trained the
network to perform a certain task, i.e., to extract the optic
flow from a movie. While optimizing the network in this
respect, they looked at the receptive fields of the various
visual interneurons only as a corollary. In contrast, I used
the match between the modeled and measured responses of
selected visual interneurons as a cost for parameter optimization. (2) Lappalainen et al. (2024) used recti-linear model
elements, whereas the neurons in my simulation were all
conductance-based. (3) Lappalainen et al. (2024) had the
synaptic strength of each non-zero connection of the connectome as a free parameter, whereas I used a uniform input
and output gain of each neuron applied to all its input and
output synapses according to the weights defined in the
connectome. This not only led to fewer free parameters in
my study (138 here vs. 734 in Lappalainen et al., 2024), it
also led to more stringent confinement by the connectomic
data. (4) Most importantly, in the context of the question
investigated in my study, Lappalainen et al. (2024) had the
time-constant of each individual model element as a free
parameter, whereas all neurons in my study had identical
leak conductance and membrane capacitance: when isolated
from the network, this would result in identical membrane
time-constants.
The main result of the network simulation presented
above is that the difference in intrinsic membrane properties
of the first order interneurons, i.e., L1-L3, is most critical
for the dynamics of all subsequent medulla neurons. Specifically, the H-current expressed in lamina cells L1 and L2
but not in L3 determines the transient vs. sustained nature
of medulla neurons providing input to motion-sensitive neurons T4 in the ON- and T5 in the OFF-pathway. Since the
different dynamics of input neurons is a prerequisite for the
computation of the motion direction (Kim et al., 2014; Borst
et al., 2020a, b; Borst & Groschner, 2023) this study further predicts that knocking down the transcript of the gene
encoding for the HCN-channel by RNAi should not only
alter response dynamics of columnar medulla neurons, but
also strongly impair direction-selectivity in T4 and T5 cells.

13

518

Fig. 6 Model simulation with H-current shut off in L1, L2 and L5. Responses
of model neurons (in red) after parameters optimized with H-current to fit
experimental data (in gray). (A) Top: Spatial profiles of the receptive field
of the five lamina cells L1-L5. Bottom: Temporal step response of the same

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

neurons. (B) Same as A, but for columnar elements of the ON-pathway,
Mi1, Tm3, Mi4 and Mi9. (C) Same as A, but for columnar elements of the
OFF-pathway, Tm1, Tm2, Tm4 and Tm9

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520

Fig. 7 Model Evaluation. Shown are the 10 best models from 20 optimization runs. (A, B) Remaining cost values of models without (A)
and with (B) an H-current. (C, D) Correlation matrix showing the
Pearson Correlation Coefficient of all parameters between each of the

519

10 models, without (C) and with (D) an H-current. (E, F) Average values +- variance of selected model parameters from the 10 best models
without (E) and with (F) an H-current

13

520
Acknowledgements I thank Janne Lappalainen for providing the
intra- and inter-columnar connectivity matrices, Franz Rieger for help
with PyTorch, and Juergen Haag, Michael Deistler, Georg Ammer and
Lukas Groschner for comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by the Max Planck Society.
Author contributions A.B. conceived the study, wrote the simulation
code and main manuscript text and prepared all figures.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt
DEAL.
Data availability All data and python code are available on github
([GitHub - axelborst/temporal\_filtering](https:/github.com/axelborst/
temporal_filtering))

Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​​​/​​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​​v​e​c​​o​m​m​o​​n​​s​.​​o​
r​​​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​​e​s​/​​b​​y​/​4​.​0​/.

References
Arenz, A., Drews, M. S., Richter, F. G., Ammer, G., & Borst, A.
(2017). The temporal tuning of the Drosophila motion detectors
is determined by the dynamics of their input elements. Current
Biology,27, 929–944.
Baden, T., Berens, P., Bethge, M., & Euler, T. (2013). Spikes in mammalian bipolar cells support temporal layering of the inner retina.
Current Biology,23, 48–52.
Behnia, R., Clark, D. A., Carter, A. G., Clandinin, T. R., & Desplan,
C. (2014). Processing properties of ON and OFF pathways for
Drosophila motion detection. Nature,512, 427–430.
Borst, A., & Groschner, L. N. (2023). How flies see motion. Annual
Review of Neuroscience,46, 17–37.
Borst, A., & Leibold, C. (2023). Connecting connectomes to physiology. Journal of Neuroscience, 43, 3599–3610.
Borst, A., Haag, J., & Mauss, A. S. (2020a). How fly neurons compute
the direction of visual motion. Journal of Comparative Physiology A,206, 109–124.
Borst, A., Drews, M., & Meier, M. (2020b). The neural network behind
the eyes of a fly. Current Opinion in Physiology,16, 1–10.
Davis, F. P., Nern, A., Picard, S., Reiser, M. B., Rubin, G. M., Eddy, S.
R., & Henry, G. L. (2020). A genetic, genomic, and computational

13

Journal of Computational Neuroscience (2025) 53:507–520
resource for exploring neural circuit function. eLife, 2020,
e50901.
Dayan, P., & Abbott, L. F. (2001). Theoretical Neuroscience: Computational and Mathematical Modelling of Neural Systems. The
MIT Press.
Dorkenwald, S., et al. (2024). Neuronal wiring diagram of an adult
brain. Nature,634, 124–138.
Drews, M. S., Leonhardt, A., Pirogova, N., Richter, F. G., Schuetzenberger, A., Braun, L., Serbe, E., & Borst, A. (2020). Dynamic
signal compression for robust motion vision in flies. Current Biology,30, 209–221.
Groschner, L. N., Wah Hak, L. C., Bogacz, R., Das Gupta, S., & Miesenboeck, G. (2018). Dendritic integration of sensory evidence in
perceptual decision-making. Cell, 173, 894–905.
Groschner, L. N., Malis, J. G., Zuidinga, B., & Borst, A. (2022). A biophysical account of multiplication by a single neuron. Nature,603,
119–123.
Guer, B., Sporar, K., Lopez-Behling, A., & Silies, M. (2020). Distinct
expression of potassium channels regulates visual response properties of lamina neurons in Drosophila melanogaster. Journal
of Comparative Physiology A, Sensory, Neural, and Behavioral
Physiology,206, 273–287.
Hardie, R. C. (1989). A histamine-activated chloride channel involved
in neurotransmission at a photoreceptor synapse. Nature,339,
704–706.
Joesch, M., Schnell, B., Raghu, S., Reiff, D. F., & Borst, A. (2010).
ON and OFF pathways in Drosophila motion vision. Nature, 468,
300–304.
Kim, J. S., et al. (2014). Space-time wiring specificity supports direction selectivity in the retina. Nature,509, 331–336.
Kohn, J. R., Portes, J. P., Christenson, P., Abbott, L. F., & Behnia, R.
(2021). Flexible filtering by neural inputs supports motion computation across states and stimuli. Current Biology,31, 5249–5260.
Lappalainen, et al. (2024). Connectome-constrained networks predict neural activity across the fly visual system. Nature, 634,
1132–1140.
Laughlin, S. B., Howard, J., & Blakeslee, B. (1987). Synaptic limitations to contrast coding in the retina of the blowfly Calliphora.
Proc R Soc Lon B,231, 437–467.
McCormick, D. A., Huguenard, J., & Strowbridge, B. W. (1992).
Determination of state-dependent processing in thalamus by single neuron properties and neuromodulators. In D. J. McKenna &
S. F. Zornetzer (Eds.), Single neuron computation (pp. 259–290).
Academic Press.
Rusanen, J., & Weckstroem, M. (2016). Frequency-selective transmission of graded signals in large monopolar neurons of the
blowfly Calliphora vicina compound eye. Journal of Neurophysiology,115, 2052–2064.
Shinomiya, K., et al. (2019). Comparisons between the ON- and OFFedge motion pathways in the Drosophila brain. eLife,8, Article
e40025.
Strother, J. A., Nern, A., & Reiser, M. B. (2014). Direct observation of
ON and OFF pathways in the Drosophila visual system. Current
Biology,24, 976–983.
Zettler, F., & Straka, H. (1987). Synaptic chloride channels generating
hyperpolarizing on-responses in monopolar neurons of the blowfly visual system. Journal of Experimental Biology,131, 435–438.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

