ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 22 March 2016
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00019

Evidence for Dynamic Network
Regulation of Drosophila
Photoreceptor Function from
Mutants Lacking the
Neurotransmitter Histamine
An Dau 1† , Uwe Friederich 1† , Sidhartha Dongre 1 , Xiaofeng Li 1 , Murali K. Bollepalli 2 ,
Roger C. Hardie 2 and Mikko Juusola 1,3*
1

Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, 2 Department of Physiology Development and
Neuroscience, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK, 3 National Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China

Edited by:
Claude Desplan,
New York University, USA
Reviewed by:
Rudy Behnia,
Columbia University, USA
Johannes Seelig,
Center of Advanced European
Studies and Research, Germany
Saul Kato,
Research Institute of Molecular
Pathology, Austria
*Correspondence:
Mikko Juusola
m.juusola@sheffield.ac.uk
† These

authors have contributed
equally to this work.

Received: 16 January 2016
Accepted: 07 March 2016
Published: 22 March 2016
Citation:
Dau A, Friederich U, Dongre S, Li X,
Bollepalli MK, Hardie RC
and Juusola M (2016) Evidence
for Dynamic Network Regulation
of Drosophila Photoreceptor Function
from Mutants Lacking
the Neurotransmitter Histamine.
Front. Neural Circuits 10:19.
doi: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00019

Synaptic feedback from interneurons to photoreceptors can help to optimize visual
information flow by balancing its allocation on retinal pathways under changing light
conditions. But little is known about how this critical network operation is regulated
dynamically. Here, we investigate this question by comparing signaling properties and
performance of wild-type Drosophila R1–R6 photoreceptors to those of the hdcJK910
mutant, which lacks the neurotransmitter histamine and therefore cannot transmit
information to interneurons. Recordings show that hdcJK910 photoreceptors sample
similar amounts of information from naturalistic stimulation to wild-type photoreceptors,
but this information is packaged in smaller responses, especially under bright
illumination. Analyses reveal how these altered dynamics primarily resulted from network
overload that affected hdcJK910 photoreceptors in two ways. First, the missing inhibitory
histamine input to interneurons almost certainly depolarized them irrevocably, which
in turn increased their excitatory feedback to hdcJK910 R1–R6s. This tonic excitation
depolarized the photoreceptors to artificially high potentials, reducing their operational
range. Second, rescuing histamine input to interneurons in hdcJK910 mutant also
restored their normal phasic feedback modulation to R1–R6s, causing photoreceptor
output to accentuate dynamic intensity differences at bright illumination, similar to the
wild-type. These results provide mechanistic explanations of how synaptic feedback
connections optimize information packaging in photoreceptor output and novel insight
into the operation and design of dynamic network regulation of sensory neurons.
Keywords: visual perception, photoreceptor cells, information theory and signal processing, feedback synapses,
histamine

INTRODUCTION
An abundance of feedback synapses characterizes the ultrastructure of both invertebrate eyes
and vertebrate outer retinae, underlining their importance in parallel image processing (Sterling,
1983; Meinertzhagen and O’Neil, 1991). In the spatial domain, lateral inhibitory feedback, from
horizontal cells onto cone and rod outputs, results in antagonistic center-surround receptive fields

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

1

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

to be tonic and enhanced, which in turn depolarizes darkadapted hdcJK910 photoreceptors to artificially high resting
potentials. Hence, the absence of inhibitory (histaminergic)
inputs to hdcJK910 LMCs and ACs must depolarize these cells
continuously (in darkness and in light) to increase their tonic
excitatory load to R1–R6s. In concordance, under prolonged
bright stimulation hdcJK910 photoreceptors exhibited smaller
responses and narrower operational ranges than the wild-type
photoreceptors but near normal adaptation and information
transfer. Remarkably, feeding the mutants with histamine
rescued their photoreceptor function and visual behavior to the
wild-type levels. Our results imply that hdcJK910 photoreceptor
output is compressed by tonic excitatory feedback overdrive
from interneurons that lacks its normal phasic modulation,
and underline the vital role of local interneurons in regulating
photoreceptor function and normal vision.

that accentuate image contrasts (Thoreson et al., 2008; Jackman
et al., 2011). Chromatically, negative feedback to cones is deemed
critical for color constancy and opponency in non-mammalian
vertebrates (Burkhardt, 1993; Thoreson and Mangel, 2012).
But in the temporal domain, it is less well understood how
interneuron feedback contributes to photoreceptors’ signaling
dynamics and performance, partly because acquiring long-lasting
intracellular recordings from the intact vertebrate retina is
difficult.
The Drosophila eye is an advantageous model system
to study time-dependent feedback functions (Figure 1). Its
photoreceptors and interneurons encode comparable visual
environments to many vertebrate retinae yet are accessible
to high-quality intracellular recordings in vivo. Synaptic
connections in the photoreceptor-lamina network have been
reconstructed from electron-micrographs (Rivera-Alba et al.,
2011), providing wiring diagrams for local interactions. R1–
R6 photoreceptors, which sample light information from
the same point in space, form output synapses onto large
monopolar cells L1–L3 (LMCs) and amacrine cells (ACs),
while most feedback connections to photoreceptors are from
L4, L2, and ACs. Histamine is likely the photoreceptors’ sole
neurotransmitter, driving the inhibitory feedforward pathway
(Hardie, 1987, 1989; Sarthy, 1991), whereas direct feedback
elements to photoreceptors seem excitatory; glutamatergic
and cholinergic (Kolodziejczyk et al., 2008; Raghu and Borst,
2011; Takemura et al., 2011; Hu et al., 2015). Importantly, fly
genetics provide tools to modify transmission in both directions.
Our earlier work indicated that interneuron feedback adjusts
photoreceptor output actively (Figure 1A), protecting it from
saturation and improving its signal quality with enriched
modulation (Zheng et al., 2006). Findings from mutants revealed
that feedforward and feedback are tightly coupled, where
defect in one pathway leads to detrimental alteration in the
other (Figure 1B), resulting in impaired network adaptation
(Nikolaev et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2009) and suboptimal vision
(Hu et al., 2015). These results further support studies from
blowfly (Calliphora vicina) photoreceptors and LMCs, which
showed that the communication within the photoreceptorlamina network is graded and continuous in darkness and
light (Laughlin et al., 1987; Juusola et al., 1995; Uusitalo et al.,
1995a,b).
Histidine decarboxylase, the enzyme responsible for histamine
synthesis, is coded by the hdc gene in the Drosophila genome
(Burg et al., 1993). The null allele hdcJK910 lacks histamine,
and its photoreceptors cannot communicate synaptically
with interneurons, making these mutants presumably blind.
Nonetheless, since its phototransduction appears similar to that
in wild-type flies (Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2009) and its feedback
pathways are intact, this mutant can give useful insight into
dynamic network regulation (Figure 1C).
To investigate how a lack of histamine affects the functional
roles of interneuron feedback in shaping photoreceptor output,
we examined the signaling dynamics and performance of hdcJK910
R1–R6 photoreceptors in darkness and over a broad light
intensity range. We found that the lack of the inhibitory
feedforward pathway causes excitatory interneuron feedback

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fly Stocks
hdcJK910 flies were a gift from Erich Buchner’s lab (JuliusMaximilians-Universität, Würzburg, Germany). As part
of stocks maintenance procedures, wild-type and mutant
flies were regularly checked by their clearly distinguishable
electroretinograms (ERG). hdcJK910 ERGs lack on- and offtransients (Burg et al., 1993; Melzig et al., 1996, 1998), implying
that R1–R6 photoreceptor output synapses in the lamina fail
to transmit light information to visual interneurons. Note that
the inner photoreceptors (R7/R8) are also affected in hdcJK910
mutant, but this effect is not analyzed here; see (Wardill et al.,
2012). Flies were reared in standard fly food medium with 12:12 h
dark:light cycle and kept at room temperature (20–22◦ C).

Histamine Rescue
Following the published protocol (Melzig et al., 1998), hdcJK910
flies were transferred to a vial containing a Whatman filter soaked
in an aqueous 5% histaminediphosphate (Sigma, UK) solution
and kept there 24 h before the behavioral and electrophysiological
experiments.

In Vivo Electrophysiology
Intracellular Recordings
We prepared 3–7 days old (adult) female flies for in vivo
experiments. A fly was fixed in a conical fly holder with
beeswax, and a small hole (6–10 ommatidia) for the recording
microelectrode entrance was cut in its dorsal cornea and
Vaseline-sealed to protect the eye (Juusola and Hardie, 2001b;
Zheng et al., 2006). Conventional filamented sharp quartz and
borosilicate microelectrodes (Sutter Instruments, USA), filled
with 3 M KCl and having 120–200 M resistance, were
used for intracellular recordings from R1–R6 photoreceptors.
A reference electrode, filled with fly ringer, was gently pushed
through ocelli ∼100 µm into the fly head. Only stable high
quality recordings, which lasted tens of minutes without clear
changes in sensitivity or resting potential, were included in this
study. We have optimized the intracellular recordings method,

2

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 1 | Outline for studying time-dependent synaptic feedback effects on Drosophila photoreceptor functions. Schematic of R1–R6
photoreceptor-interneuron circuits in wild-type and mutant laminae. (A) In the wild-type, inhibitory histaminergic feedforward (−) and excitatory feedback (+)
connections are dynamically balanced. (B) Reduced inhibitory feedforward synaptic transmissions in ebony and ortP306 lead to enhanced excitatory feedback from
interneurons to their photoreceptors (Zheng et al., 2006). (C) In hdcJK910 , the inhibitory feedforward pathway is completely blocked, enabling us to investigate how
this affects the interneuron feedback and consequently R1–R6 output.

2001b; Juusola and de Polavieja, 2003), with an interface package
for National Instruments (USA) boards (MATDAQ; H. P. C.
Robinson).

together with bespoke hardware and software tools, over the
last 18 years to provide high-quality long-lasting recordings.
Therefore, experienced experimentalists in our laboratory can
obtain high-quality penetrations with 60–95% success rate. In
darkness, the resting potentials of both wild-type Canton-S and
hdcJK910 mutants were <−50 mV and maximum responses to
saturating bright pulses were >40 mV. In the experiments, the
fly temperature was kept at 19 ± 1◦ C by a feedback-controlled
Peltier device (Juusola and Hardie, 2001b). Note, we could not
identify intracellular hdcJK910 LMC penetrations because we did
not find their voltage responses to light.
Light stimulation was delivered to the studied R1–R6
photoreceptor at the center of its receptive field with a highintensity green light-emitting diode (LED) (Marl Optosource,
with peak emission at 525 nm), through a fiber optic
bundle, fixed on a rotatable Cardan arm, subtending 5◦
as seen by the fly. Its intensity was controlled by neutral
density filters (Kodak Wratten; Juusola and Hardie, 2001b).
The results are mostly shown for Dim (∼6,000 photons/s),
Medium (Mid: ∼6 × 105 photons/s), and Bright luminance
(∼6 × 106 photons/s), as extrapolated from earlier single photon
response calibrations; or log −3, log −1, and log 0, respectively.
Voltage responses were amplified in current-clamp mode
using a 15 kHz switching rate (SEC-10L single-electrode
amplifier; NPI Electronic, Germany). The stimuli and responses
were low-pass filtered at 500 Hz (KemoVBF8), and sampled
at 1 or 10 kHz. The data were often re-sampled/processed
off-line at 1–2 kHz for the analysis. Stimulus generation and
data acquisition were performed by custom-written Matlab
(MathWorks, USA) programs: BIOSYST (Juusola and Hardie,

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

Logarithmically Stepped Naturalistic Stimulation
In the histamine rescue experiments, the light stimulus was
delivered at the center of a R1–R6 photoreceptor’s receptive
field, using a Cardan arm system. But in this case, the stimulus
presented a sequential light intensity time series mix, delivered
by two identical high-performance “white” LEDs (each with
a blue–green–red chip-set; dual-channel Cairn OptoLED, UK).
Their light outputs were collected by liquid light guides and
fused together (to a single end) by a T-connector (Friederich
et al., 2009). The LED’s outputs could be attenuated by separate
neutral density filter sets. The measured linear light output was
taken as the input to the photoreceptors. Its light modulation
(stimulus pattern) was selected from the van Hateren’s naturalstimulus-collection (van Hateren, 1997), played back at 2 kHz
and measured by a photo diode circuit. Voltage responses
(output) and light stimuli (input) were low-pass filtered with
a cut-off at 1 kHz before sampling with 2 kHz, and stored
for off-line analysis. By driving the two LEDs sequentially
through the predetermined neutral density filters, we could
change the light level of the stimulus pattern in logarithmic
steps rapidly (<0.1 ms). This provided with 0, 1, 2, 3, and
4 log intensity units attenuation, and thus five different light
levels (BG0-BG4); BG0 = bright; BG1 = mid; BG3 = dim.
Twenty second stimulation at each light level consisted of
10 repetitions of a 2 s naturalistic light intensity time series
pattern.

3

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

output and has the inverse waveform of photoreceptors’
intracellular voltage responses, while on- and off-transients
originate from the postsynaptic cells in the lamina (Coombe,
1986).

Current-Clamp
Electric membrane properties of dark-adapted photoreceptors
were investigated by injecting current steps of ±0.04, ±0.13,
±0.21, and ±0.3 nA. Membrane input resistance, Rm , was
calculated by the most hyperpolarized voltage (U) evoked by a
−0.04 nA current step (I) according to Ohm’s law:
Rm =

U
I

Electron Micrographs
Fixation
Flies were cold anesthetized on ice and transferred to a drop of
pre-fixative [modified Karnovsky’s fixative: 2.5% glutaraldehyde,
2.5% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffered
to pH 7.3 – as per (Shaw et al., 1989)] on a transparent agar
dissection dish. Dissection was performed using a shard of a razor
blade (Feather S). Flies were restrained on their backs with insect
pins through their lower abdomen and distal proboscis. Their
heads were severed, proboscis excised, and halved. Left half halfheads were collected in fresh pre-fixative and kept for 2 h at room
temperature under normal lighting conditions.
After pre-fixation, the half-heads were washed (2 × 15 min)
in 0.1 M Cacodylate buffer, and then transferred to a 1 h postfixative step, comprising Veronal Acetate buffer and 2% Osmium
Tetroxide in the fridge (4◦ C). They were moved back to room
temperature for a 9 min wash (1:1 Veronal Acetate and doubledistilled H2 O mixture), and serially dehydrated in multi-well
plates with subsequent 9 min washes in 50, 70, 80, 90, 95, and
2 × 100% ethanol.
Post-dehydration, the half-heads were transferred to small
glass vials for infiltration. They were covered in Propylene
Oxide (PPO) for 2 × 9 min, transferred into a 1:1 PPO:Epoxy
resin mixture (Poly/Bed 812) and left overnight. The following
morning, the half-heads were placed in freshly made pure resin
for 4 h, and placed in fresh resin for a further 72 h at 60◦ C in
the oven. Fixation protocol was kindly provided by Professor Ian
Meinertzhagen at Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia.

(1)

As shown in previous publications (Vähäsöyrinki et al., 2006;
Zheng et al., 2006; Abou Tayoun et al., 2011), outcomes of this
measurement vary depending on the type of electrode used, room
temperature, the experimentalist and other unaccounted factors.
To ensure fair comparisons between wild-type and hdcJK910
recordings, we carried out all of these experiments within a week
while alternating between the two genotypes and using similar
borosilicate electrodes.

Whole-Cell Recordings
Dissociated ommatidia were prepared from recently eclosed
adult flies of either sex and transferred to a recording chamber
on an inverted Nikon Diaphot microscope (Hardie et al.,
2002). The control bath solution contained the following (in
mM): 120 NaCl, 5 KCl, 10 N-Tris-(hydroxymethyl)-methyl-2aminoethanesulfonic acid (TES), 4 MgCl2 , 1.5 CaCl2 , 25 proline,
and 5 alanine. Osmolarity was adjusted to ∼283 mOsm. The
standard intracellular solution used in the recording pipette was
composed of the following (in mM): 140 K+ gluconate, 10 TES,
4 Mg2+ ATP, 2 MgCl2 , 1 NAD, and 0.4 Na+ GTP. Data were
recorded at 20 ± 1◦ C with an Axopatch 200 amplifier and
analyzed with pClamp 9 or 10 software (Molecular Devices).
Cells were stimulated by a green (540 nm) LED with intensities
calibrated in terms of effectively absorbed photons by counting
quantum bumps at low intensities in wild-type flies (Henderson
et al., 2000; Hardie et al., 2002). Voltage-gated K+ -conductances
were recorded as explained previously (Hardie, 1991a).

R

Sectioning and Staining
Embedded half-heads were first sectioned (at 0.5 µm thickness)
using a glass knife, mounted in an ultramicrotome (ReichertJung Ultracut E, Germany). Samples were collected on glass
slides, stained using Toluidine Blue and observed under a light
microscope. This process was repeated and the cutting angle was
continuously optimized until the correct orientation and sample
depth was achieved; stopping when approximately 40 ommatidia
were discernible. The block was then trimmed and shaped for
ultra-thin sectioning. The trimming is necessary to reduce cutting
pressure on the sample-block and resulting sections, thus helping
to prevent “chattering” and compression artifacts.
Ultra-thin sections (85 nm thickness) were cut using a
diamond cutting knife (DiATOME Ultra 45◦ , USA), mounted
and controlled using the ultramicrotome. The knife edge was
first cleaned using a polystyrol rod to ensure integrity of the
sample-blocks. The cutting angles were aligned and the automatic
approach- and return-speeds set on the microtome. Sectioning
was automatic and samples were collected in the knife water boat.
Sections were transferred to Formvar-coated mesh-grids and
stained for imaging: 25 min in Uranyl Acetate; a double-distilled
H2 O wash; 5 min in Reynolds’ Lead Citrate (Reynolds, 1963); and
a final double-distilled H2 O wash.

Electroretinograms
Electroretinograms were recorded from intact flies as previously
described (e.g., Satoh et al., 2010). Briefly, female 1–2 weeks
old flies were fixed into truncated plastic Gilson pipette tips,
using low melting point wax, and stimulated by 1 s light pulses
from a red (640 nm) LED with the brightest effective intensity,
estimated to be ∼6 × 106 effective photons/photoreceptor/s. Both
recording and reference electrodes were filled with fly ringer (in
mM): 120 NaCl, 5 KCl, 1.5 CaCl2 , 4 MgCl2 , 20 proline, and 5
alanine. The recording electrode was inserted into the retina by
piercing the cornea and the indifferent electrode into the head
capsule near the ocelli. Recorded signals were low-pass filtered at
200 Hz and amplified via a Neurolog DC amplifier (Digitimer,
UK).
Electroretinogram potentials recorded from wild-type
Drosophila retinae comprise two main components: a maintained
background and transients coinciding with changes in light
stimuli (Heisenberg, 1971). The maintained background
potential (or slow component) is attributed to photoreceptor

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

4

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

where T is the length of the “words,” v the number of voltage
levels (in digitized amplitude resolution) and the size of the data
file. The difference between the entropy and noise entropy rates is
the rate of information transfer, R (Shannon, 1948). See (Juusola
and de Polavieja, 2003) for further details.

Flight Simulator Experiments
We used 3–7 days old hdcJK910 and WT female flies. The
flies were tethered in a classic torque meter (Tang and Guo,
2001) with heads fixed, and lowered by a manipulator into
the center of a black–white cylinder (spectral full-width: 380–
900 nm). A flying fly saw a continuous panoramic scene (360◦ )
of multiple vertical stripes. After viewing the still scene for
1 s, it was spun counterclockwise by a linear stepping motor
for 2 s, stopped for 2 s before rotating clockwise for 2 s, and
stopped again for 1 s. This 8 s stimulus was repeated 10 times
and each trial, together with the fly’s yaw torque responses, was
sampled at 1 kHz (Wardill et al., 2012). Flies followed the scene
rotations, generating yaw torque responses (optomotor responses
to right and left), the strength of which reflects the strength of
their motion perception. Stimulus parameters for the moving
stripe scenes were as follows: azimuth ± 360◦ , elevation ± 45◦ ,
wavelength 14◦ , and contrast 1.0, as seen by the fly. The velocity
of the scene rotations was 45◦ /s.

Shannon Information Transfer Rate
To cross-check the triple extrapolation method results, we further
estimated information transfer rate, R, based on signal-to-noise
ratio of photoreceptor responses by using Shannon’s formula:
Z ∞
R=
(log2 [SNR(f )+])df
(3)
0

where SNR(f ) is the signal-to-noise ratio computed for each
frequency.
Since a data sampling rate of 1 kHz was used for every
naturalistic stimulation experiment, this estimation did not
integrate information rate for frequencies from 0 to infinity, but
from 2 Hz to 500 Hz instead. However, the limited bandwidth
would not considerably affect estimation results because high
frequency components have SNR <<1 and therefore contain
mostly noise.
Finite data can be used to estimate information transfer rate
using the Shannon method with the following assumptions:
(i) input stimulus is Gaussian, (ii) response is linear and (iii)
noise is Gaussian and additive (Shannon, 1948). Thus, estimation
accuracy of this method could be affected as these assumptions
were not satisfied in photoreceptor responses to naturalistic
stimuli (van Hateren and Snippe, 2001; Juusola and de Polavieja,
2003).
Although the triple extrapolation method is not based on
assumptions of response and noise statistics, errors could occur
in its triple extrapolation to the infinite limit of three finite
parameters: data length, time interval, and digitized voltage level.
Nevertheless, both methods, each of which is based on
different principles and has different limitations, produced
similar estimates and consistent relative comparisons
(Figures 7G and 8). Notice also that these estimates were
obtained for the recordings at 19 ± 1◦ C. This temperature
was chosen to be akin to ex vivo whole-cell recordings for
direct comparisons. But as warming improves photoreceptors’
encoding performance (Juusola and Hardie, 2001b), their
information transfer rate estimates are higher at higher
temperatures; e.g., >400 bits/s for comparable bright naturalistic
stimuli at 25◦ C (Song and Juusola, 2014).
Relative variation, RV, was used to approximate the extent
of cell-to-cell variations. For measurements or parameters
computed from responses of photoreceptors belonging to
each group (the wild-type or hdcJK910 ), relative variation is
calculated as:
Standard deviation
RV =
(4)
mean

Data Analysis
The signal was the average of consecutive 1,000 ms long voltage
responses to a repeated light intensity time series, selected from
the van Hateren naturalistic stimulus library (van Hateren, 1997),
and its power spectrum was calculated using Matlab’s Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) algorithm. First 10–20 responses were omitted
because of their adaptive trends, and only approximately steadystate adapted responses were analyzed.
The noise was the difference between individual responses
and the signal, and its power spectra were calculated from the
corresponding traces (Juusola et al., 1994). To eliminate samplesize bias, the same amount of responses (n = 60 traces) was used
for analyzing each wild-type or hdcJK910 recording to the repeated
stimulus. Thus, 60 trials gave one signal trace and 60 noise traces.
Both signal and noise data were chunked into 50% overlapping
stretches and windowed with a Blackman-Harris-term window,
each giving three 500-point-long samples. This gave 180 spectral
samples for the noise and three spectral samples for the signal,
which were averaged, respectively, to improve the estimates.

Triple Extrapolation Method
We used triple extrapolation method (Juusola and de Polavieja,
2003) to estimate the rate of information transfer of steadystate-adapted photoreceptor voltage responses to naturalistic
stimulation. This method, unlike signal-to-noise ratio analysis,
requires no assumptions about the signal and noise distributions
or their additivity (Juusola and de Polavieja, 2003). Voltage
responses were digitized by sectioning them into time intervals,
T, that were subdivided into smaller intervals t = 1 ms. (Only dim
luminance data was down-sampled to 125 Hz, giving t = 8 ms,
which better represented their slow dynamics). In the final step,
the estimates for the entropy rate, RS , and noise entropy rate,
RN , were then extrapolated from the values of the experimentally
obtained entropies to their successive limits, as in (Juusola and de
Polavieja, 2003):

Probability Density Functions (PDFs)
Probability density functions (PDFs) were calculated for the 1st,
2nd, and 15th s of photoreceptor responses to Bright NS. Initially,
the mean of each 1-s-long response is removed. Then, histograms

1
T,ϑ,size
R = Rs − RN = lim
lim lim (H T,ϑ,size − HN
) (2)
T→∞ T ϑ→∞ size→∞ S

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

5

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

turns (optomotor responses) in wild-type flies (left), highlighting
the perceptual potency of this stimulus paradigm.
Structurally, hdcJK910 photoreceptors were wild-type-like.
Electron micrographs from wild-type and hdcJK910 retinae
(Figures 2F,G, respectively) appeared similar, indicating
that hdcJK910 photoreceptors have normal ultrastructure
although their rhabdomere dimensions were slightly smaller.
Hence, collectively, these results imply that whilst hdcJK910
rhabdomeres may sample light information normally, the
mutants are effectively blind because neurotransmission from
their photoreceptors to lamina interneurons is missing.

of their voltage outputs were created by using 2 mV bin size
(resolution). Finally, because each response has 1,000 data point,
PDFs were calculated by dividing the y-axis of histograms by
1,000.

Statistics
Test responses were compared with their controls by performing
t-tests. One-tailed tests were used for testing the hypothesis
that something was smaller or larger than, while two-tailed tests
evaluated the difference in the compared datasets. Welch’s t-test
was used to accommodate groups with different variances for
the unpaired comparisons. In the figures, asterisks are used to
mark the statistical significance: ns indicates p > 0.05, ∗ indicates
p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗ indicates p ≤ 0.01, and ∗∗∗ indicates p ≤ 0.001.

hdcJK910 Photoreceptors’ Operating
Range is Compromised
Based on the ERG data, hdcJK910 photoreceptors fail to transmit
light changes to lamina interneurons. However, surprisingly,
their slow component, which presumably charts photoreceptor
output strength (light sensitivity) and is routinely assumed to be
independent of feedforward neurotransmission, was dramatically
reduced with respect to that of wild-type flies (Figure 2B).
Hence, we next asked whether this difference in photoreceptor
function could in fact reflect re-balancing of feedback loads in the
photoreceptor-interneuron circuits (Figure 1C). We reasoned
that such re-balancing probably involves both fast dynamic
and gradual homeostatic (intrinsic and synaptic ion channel
expression) regulation, and that the photoreceptor function,
therefore, would reflect their joint contributions.
We started investigating this question in dark-adapted retinae
by quantifying whether or how hdcJK910 R1–R6 photoreceptors’
intracellular signaling properties differ from those of wildtype flies (Figure 3A). Because R1–R6s are short with high
length constants, recordings from their somata can be used to
quantify how changes in feedforward and feedback pathways
affect their responses (Nikolaev et al., 2009). Their average
responses, recorded in vivo to brief (10 ms) light pulses of
different intensity, are shown in Figure 3B. The cells responded
with graded depolarizations of similar rise-times over most
tested light intensities (Figure 3C). But clear differences were
seen in hdcJK910 responses to Mid to Bright intensities, which
returned to resting potential more slowly than in wild-type
photoreceptors (Figure 3D), as quantified at 80% of the
maxima. Nevertheless, hdcJK910 response amplitudes to brief
flashes seemed wild-type-like over the tested light intensity
range (Figure 3E). Overall, the results suggest that the primary
phototransduction mechanisms, which sample photons and
integrate the resulting elementary responses (quantum bumps)
into macroscopic responses, would be functioning more or less
normally in hdcJK910 photoreceptors.
Next, to compare how progressive light adaptation affects
hdcJK910 and wild-type photoreceptor outputs, we recorded their
voltage responses to prolonged (1 s) Dim (−3), Mid (−1), and
Bright (0 log unit) light pulses (Figure 4A). A fly photoreceptor’s
typical response waveform comprises an initial peak and a
plateau, which can be partly explained by its refractory photon
sampling characteristics (Song et al., 2012). After sufficient darkadaptation, most of its ∼30,000 microvilli (sampling units) are

RESULTS
hdcJK910 Mutants are Blind because
Their Photoreceptors Lack
Neurotransmitter
We first asked whether hdcJK910 mutants could see. Although the
lack of histamine synthesis should prevent histaminergic
information transfer from hdcJK910 photoreceptors to
interneurons (Hardie, 1989; Burg et al., 1993; Melzig et al., 1998),
some vision might still be possible if the photoreceptors expressed
another neurotransmitter or, because of dynamic or homeostatic
changes in the lamina network (Zheng et al., 2006; Abou Tayoun
et al., 2011), light information were channeled to interneurons
through gap-junctions (Wardill et al., 2012). Therefore, we
tested hdcJK910 mutants’ sight both electrophysiologically and
behaviorally, covering neurotransmission in the eye and any
perception in the brain (Figure 2).
The eyes’ global electrical responses (ERGs; Figure 2A,
left) to repeated bright 1 s light pulses were measured with
an electrode inserted into the distal retina, which integrated
extracellular activity of their photoreceptors and interneurons
over a large field of view (right). The recordings (Figure 2B)
confirmed earlier results that hdcJK910 ERGs completely lack the
characteristic on- and off-transients of the wild-type responses
(Burg et al., 1993; Melzig et al., 1998), indicating a total block
of hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ neurotransmission to interneurons.
Interestingly, however, their slow hyperpolarizing components
were also consistently smaller (p < 0.007) than the wildtype counterparts over a 105 light intensity range (Figure 2C),
suggesting that hdcJK910 photoreceptors were about 10-fold less
sensitive, as seen by the rightward shift in their V/logI-function.
In concordance with the ERG data, tethered flying hdcJK910
mutants in a flight simulator system failed to track bright
panoramic field rotations (Figure 2D). These findings support
the former results about hdcJK910 mutants’ unresponsiveness to
pattern luminance changes (Melzig et al., 1996). The mutants
could be motivated to fly by airflow, but their flight behavior
seemed haphazard and uncoupled to optomotor stimuli, resulting
in much smaller maximum responses (Figure 2E). In striking
contrast, the same stimuli invariably evoked strong reflex-like

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

6

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 2 | Continued

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

7

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 2 | Continued
Lack of photoreceptors’ neurotransmitter histamine makes hdcJK910 mutants blind. (A) Schematic shows how electroretinograms (ERG) were recorded
in vivo from intact Drosophila, restricted inside a conical holder (left). Corneal electrodes (left) were used to pick up electrical signals of light-induced global eye
activity, which in the wild-type is dominated by slow photoreceptor and fast lamina interneuron components (on- and off-spikes). In each lamina cartridge, inhibitory
(histaminergic) feedforward signals from R1–R6 photoreceptor axons (minus-signs) transmit information from the same small area in the visual space. In return,
R1–R6 axons receive excitatory (cholinergic and glutamatergic) feedback signals (plus-signs) from L2/AC and L4 interneurons. hdcJK910 mutants lack the inhibitory
feedforward. (B) ERGs measured from hdcJK910 and wild-type flies to 1 s long very bright red (640 nm) pulse. Mutant ERGs showed remarkably smaller Photoreceptor
Component (ERG PChdc = −7.5 ± 1.3 mV, ERG PCwild−type = −14.6 ± 0.8 mV, p = 4.594 × 10−4 , nhdc = 7, nwild−type = 8 flies) and no on- and off-transients.
The large transients in wild-type flies indicate normal neurotransmission from photoreceptors to interneurons. (C) hdcJK910 ERG’s photoreceptor component was
consistently smaller than that in the wild-type over a broad intensity range (p < 3.50 × 10−4 , one-tailed t-test, nhdc = 10, nwild−type = 10 flies), indicating 10-fold
In
JK910
reduced sensitivity. Data fitted by the standard V/logI equation (Hill-equation): V = Vmax ( I n +I
n ). (D) Optomotor responses of tethered flying wild-type and hdc
50
flies to left (counter-clockwise) and right (clockwise) stripe-field rotations, measured in a classic Drosophila flight simulator system. Wild-type flies generate clear
and consistent yaw torque responses, intending to follow the field rotations, while the responses of hdcJK910 flies seem haphazard. (E) The maximum optomotor
responses of hdcJK910 flies are significantly weaker than those of wild-type flies (ORhdc = 0.7 ± 0.1 a.u., ORwild−type = 2.0 ± 0.2 a.u., p = 1.56 × 10−4 , one-tailed
t-test, nhdc = 5, nwild−type = 7 flies). (F) Characteristic electron micrograph of R1–R7 photoreceptors in wild-type retinae. (G) Characteristic electron micrograph of
R1–R7 photoreceptors in hdcJK910 retinae. Whilst overall hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ ultrastructure seems normal, the mean R1–R6 rhabdomere cross-sectional area
is 28.6% smaller than that of the wildtype (Rhabhdc = 2.05 ± 0.06 µm2 , Rhabwild−type = 2.87 ± 0.13 µm2 , p = 7.71 × 10−7 , one-tailed t-test, nhdc = 18 cells,
nwild−type = 18 cells, 3 flies). (B–E) Mean ± SEM. All recordings performed at t = 19◦ C.

similar amplitudes and dynamics (Figure 5B), their macroscopic
LICs to 1 ms light flashes rose and decayed more slowly than
those of wild-type photoreceptors, with the response decay
being considerably more decelerated (Figure 5C). Nevertheless,
the cells’ quantum efficiency appeared similar, indicating that
their microvilli sampled photons with similar success. Secondly,
the membrane capacitance (Cm ) of hdcJK910 photoreceptors
seemed slightly lower than wild-type (Figure 5D), which is
consistent with their slightly smaller rhabdomere membrane
areas (Figures 2F,G), but their somatic K+ -conductances were
similar to those of wild-type photoreceptors (Figure 5E).
Of these findings, the slower LIC dynamics in hdcJK910
(Figure 5C) contrast with our in vivo observations the most
(cf. Figure 3B); as in the intact retina, the mutant and
wild-type impulse responses showed largely uniform rise-time
dynamics. An explanation for this difference could be that
homeostatic network regulation partially restores the dynamic
coding of light intensities in vivo. However, because hdcJK910
lamina interneurons do not receive synaptic information
from photoreceptors, their feedback signal is expected to be
independent of light intensity. Thus, two questions arise here:
how does such tonic interneuron feedback affect photoreceptors’
in vivo membrane conductances? And, how do light-sensitive
and light-insensitive conductances and synaptic feedback jointly
shape hdcJK910 photoreceptor output?
To discover the impact of interneuron feedback on the
membrane when feedforward synaptic pathways are blocked and
without the LIC interference, we investigated in vivo membrane
properties of dark-adapted photoreceptors with single-electrode
current-clamp technique. We discovered that voltage responses
to injected current steps were indistinguishable in wild-type and
hdcJK910 mutant photoreceptor somata (Figure 5F). Moreover,
their membrane input resistances, Rm , which were calculated
from hyperpolarizing responses to a small negative current step
(−0.04 nA) to minimize activation of voltage-gated K+ channels
(Hardie, 1991a), showed similar ranges (Figure 5G).
But perhaps most interestingly, the resting potentials of
mutant photoreceptors, which had stable responses for 20 min
or longer, were regularly ∼6 mV more depolarized than their

available to produce quantum bumps to absorbed photons,
summation of which constitutes the initial peak. From then on,
fewer microvilli can be photon-activated because many are now
refractory, a period which lasts 50–300 ms. Therefore, depending
on the light pulse intensity and the number of microvilli used in
the previous phase, the plateau can be significantly lower than
the peak. Accordingly, wild-type photoreceptors showed large
initial peaks in responses to Mid and Bright but not to Dim light
pulses. Moreover, bump size becomes reduced under brighter
stimulation due to Ca2+ -dependent feedback and reduced EMF
as the cell depolarizes (Henderson et al., 2000; Juusola and
Hardie, 2001a; Song et al., 2012), contributing more to the smaller
plateau during the Bright than the Mid pulse. Crucially, hdcJK910
photoreceptors exhibited wild-type-like waveforms (Figure 4A)
but with smaller peak (Figure 4B) and plateau amplitudes
(Figure 4C). This, together with the hdcJK910 photoreceptors’
normal ultrastructure (Figures 2F,G), suggests that their photon
sampling and bump summation would occur normally (or nearnormally), but that their overall voltage output (operating range)
was compressed by separate mechanisms.

hdcJK910 Mutation Affects
Photoreceptors’ Electrical Properties
A photoreceptor’s voltage response is the outcome of a complex
convolution of three components: light-induced currents (LICs),
light-insensitive membrane conductances and synaptic feedback
from interneurons (Zheng et al., 2006; Abou Tayoun et al., 2011).
Therefore, to explain the differences in response characteristics
of the mutant and wild-type photoreceptors, it is essential to
compare their component properties in isolation (Figure 5).
Phototransduction dynamics and membrane properties
of hdcJK910 R1–R6 photoreceptors were examined ex vivo
(Figure 5A) by whole-cell patch-clamping photoreceptors in
dissociated ommatidia that were cut off from the lamina synaptic
network (Hardie, 1991b). The recordings, which were thus
free of any interneuron feedback, revealed some interesting
differences to wild-type controls. Firstly, even though hdcJK910
photoreceptors’ single-photon-responses (current bumps) had

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

8

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 3 | Dark-adapted hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ voltage responses to brief (10 ms) light pulses rise wild-type-like but decay slower. (A) Schematic
shows how in vivo microelectrode recordings were performed from R1–R6 photoreceptors. (B) Photoreceptors’ voltage responses to Bright, Mid, and Dim 10 ms
light pulses. Mutant photoreceptors (red) took longer time than the wild-type (black) to repolarize. (C) Response time-to-peak of hdcJK910 and wild-type
photoreceptors was typically similar (0.057 < p < 0.961, two-tailed t-test). (D) Average response of hdcJK910 photoreceptors typically lasted longer than that of the
wild-type in experiments using brighter flashes. (pLog−4 = 0.017; pLog−3 = 0.030; pLog−2 = 0.350; pLog−1 = 0.020; pLog−0.5 = 0.025; pLog0 = 0.033, one-tailed
t-test). (E) Average response amplitudes of hdcJK910 photoreceptors were wild-type-like (0.071 < p < 0.727, two-tailed t-test). (B–E): Mean ± SEM; nwild−type = 9,
nhdc = 8. All recordings performed at t = 19◦ C.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

9

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 4 | hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ voltage responses to long (1 s) light pulses are smaller than those of the wild-type. (A) On average, hdcJK910
photoreceptors produced smaller responses than the wild-type to long light pulses of all tested intensities, but their responses adapted similarly. The underlying
sampling dynamics are described in the main text. (B) Their maximum amplitudes differed significantly to Bright and Mid pulses. Dim:
Maxwild−type = 18.62 ± 4.28 mV, Maxhdc = 11.74 ± 1.69 mV, p = 0.194. Mid: Maxwild−type = 48.60 ± 4.14 mV, Maxhdc = 37.23 ± 1.70 mV, p = 0.049. Bright:
Maxwild−type = 51.35 ± 3.64 mV, Maxhdc = 39.35 ± 0.57 mV, p = 0.029. (C) Their plateau voltage differed significantly only in experiments with Bright light pulses.
Dim: Pwild−type = 12.51 ± 3.29 mV, Phdc = 7.44 ± 1.04 mV, p = 0.204. Mid: Pwild−type = 27.28 ± 3.86 mV, Phdc = 20.24 ± 1.87 mV, p = 0.154. Bright:
Pwild−type = 22.36 ± 2.23 mV, Phdc = 15.37 ± 1.82 mV, p = 0.043. (A–C): nwild−type = 5, nhdc = 5; Mean ± SEM, two-tailed t-test. All recordings performed at
t = 19◦ C.

and explanation concur with shibireTS1 mutant recordings
(Zheng et al., 2006), which showed that silencing all synaptic
transmission, including the LMC and AC feedback to R1–R6s,
hyperpolarize photoreceptors. Thus, with the earlier shibireTS1
data, hdcJK910 R1–R6 depolarization here indicates increased

wild-type counterparts in darkness (Figure 5H). This implies
that lack of inhibitory (histaminergic) inputs to hdcJK910 LMCs
and ACs depolarize these cells tonically – both in darkness and
in light (Laughlin et al., 1987; Uusitalo et al., 1995a), which in
turn increases their tonic excitatory load to R1–R6s.This finding

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

10

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 5 | Continued

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

11

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 5 | Continued
hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ macroscopic light-induced currents (LIC) peak and decay slower ex vivo and their in vivo dark resting potentials are
higher than the wild-type. (A) LICs and voltage-gated K+ -currents were patch-clamp recorded from hdcJK910 and wild-type R1–R6 photoreceptors in ommatidia,
dissociated from freshly eclosed flies. The image is adapted from (Abou Tayoun et al., 2011). (B) Characteristic hdcJK910 and wild-type single photon responses
and their half-widths (insert). Bumps have a similar time course and mean sizes (bumphdc = 13.9 ± 0.8 pA, bumpwild−type = 16.2 ± 1.4 pA; p = 0.158,
two-tailed t-test, nhdc = 8, nwild−type = 5). Quantum efficiency was not significantly different (QEhdc = 0.62 ± 0.04, QEwild−type = 0.64 ± 0.02; p = 0.805,
two-tailed t-test, nhdc = 8, nwild−type = 5). (C) Macroscopic hdcJK910 LICs showed slower than wild-type dynamics. (time-to-peakhdc = 60.4 ± 9.7 ms, time-topeakwild−type = 46.1 ± 8.1 ms; p = 0.008, one-tailed t-test, nhdc = 5, nwild−type = 8). (D) Interestingly, the hdcJK910 membrane capacitance was lower than the
wild-type (Chdc = 46.9 ± 5.5 pF, Cwild−type = 53.5 ± 4.2 pF; p = 0.016, one-tailed t-test, nhdc = 5, nwild−type = 8). Mean leak currents did not differ significantly
(leakhdc = −8.2 ± 10.2 pA, leakwild−type = −10.1 ± 9.0 pA; p = 0.720, two-tailed t-test, nhdc = 5, nwild−type = 8). (E) Voltage-gated K+ -currents of hdcJK910 and
wild-type R1–R6 photoreceptors show similar amplitudes and dynamics; these representative traces are well within the natural variability. (F) Voltage response of
dark-adapted wild-type and hdcJK910 photoreceptors, recorded in vivo to intracellularly injected current pulses. (G) Membrane resistance of hdcJK910 photoreceptors
are wild-type-like (m Rhdc = 170.5 ± 40.4 M, m Rwild−type = 159 ± 17.8 M; p = 0.807, two-tailed t-test, nhdc = 4, nwild−type = 4). (H) In darkness, the resting
potential of hdcJK910 photoreceptors is significantly higher than in the wild-type (V hdc = −54.5 ± 1.7 mV, V wild−type = −61.8 ± 1.74 mV; p = 0.011, one-tailed t-test,
nhdc = 4, nwild−type = 5). (D–H) Mean ± SEM. All recordings performed at t = 19◦ C.

We, therefore, analyzed how concerted actions of the
tonic interneuron feedback, naturalistic LICs and intrinsic
compensations shape photoreceptor output over time. hdcJK910
and wild-type R1–R6 outputs were recorded to repeated
naturalistic stimulation at three different brightness levels
(Figure 6A).
We found that hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ dark-to-light
adapting trends were remarkably similar, in striking contrast
to dSK − mutant data (Abou Tayoun et al., 2011). Their similar
time-course is evident in Figure 6B, which depicts the changes in
mean of each 1 s long response (or response mean) to stimulus
repetition. The corresponding response means relaxed to less
depolarized steady levels in ∼15–20 s during Bright or Mid
stimulation, but remained relatively unchanged during Dim
stimulation. Although the average hdcJK910 response mean
appeared to settle faster than that of wild-type flies at each
illumination level, this difference was not significant.
Likewise, the analyses revealed that their corresponding
waveform (Figure 6C) or output modulation, measured by the
standard deviation, changed comparably (Figure 6D). Responses
of hdcJK910 photoreceptors to Bright (not shown) stimulation
were consistently smaller than in wild-type photoreceptors but
adapted in parallel exponential trends, reaching steady-state
ranges equally fast.
Moreover, hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ PDF, which indicate how
their output ranges were utilized to represent light intensity
modulations, adapted over time in a similar manner to wildtype photoreceptors (Figure 6E). Consistent with the previous
recordings (Zheng et al., 2009), none of the examined R1–R6
outputs exhibited flattening or widening PDFs, which instead are
often seen in the postsynaptic wild-type LMC output.

excitatory interneuron feedback to them, and opposes the
alternative hypothesis of reduced inhibitory (hyperpolarizing)
feedback.
Taken together, these results suggest that hdcJK910
photoreceptors receive in vivo more depolarizing conductances
from interneuron feedback(s) than wild-type cells; but further
intrinsic compensatory mechanisms, such as possible downregulation of leak-channels (Vähäsöyrinki et al., 2006), may
restore their membrane resistance to a wild-type level, or
the real differences might be masked by a shunt introduced
by the electrode penetration. Thereby, it seems plausible
that the disrupted interneuron feedback, caused by blocking
feedforward synaptic transmissions, would alter the dynamic
equilibrium of ion channels in the photoreceptor cell membrane.
The observed reduction in hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ membrane
capacitance, which agrees with their slightly smaller rhabdomeres
(Figures 2F,G), would further lower their membrane time
constant (t m = Rm × Cm ), accelerating response conduction.
Naturally, all these changes would impact signal conduction
most at the level of axon terminals, which receive the interneuron
feedback. In general, this scenario seems consistent with the
photoreceptors’ response kinetics to 10 ms light pulses, as
recorded in the retina (Figure 3C). Convolution of hdcJK910
LICs, which would still recover slower (despite speedier axonal
conduction), with (near) normal somatic membrane properties
should yield responses with wild-type-like rising and slower
decaying phases.

hdcJK910 Photoreceptors Adapt
Wild-Type-Like to Repetitive
Dark-to-Light Stimuli
Modulation within the lamina network can have
important contributions to dynamic and homeostatic
regulation of photoreceptor output during naturalistic light
stimulation, as shown by recent findings (Abou Tayoun
et al., 2011). Despite having normal ex vivo properties,
photoreceptors of dSK − mutants with altered lamina
network, due to missing Ca2+ -activated K+ -channels,
and thus abnormal feedback signals, showed dark-to-light
adapting trends in vivo that differed markedly from the
wild-type.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

hdcJK910 Photoreceptor Output to Bright
Stimuli Carries Less Signal Power than
Wild-Type
We next asked whether or how the hdcJK910 mutation affects
the photoreceptors’ ability to sample light information and the
way this information is represented in their responses. To obtain
consistent and systematic estimates of hdcJK910 and wild-type
photoreceptors’ encoding performance, the first 10–20 1 s long
responses with adapting trends were discarded, and we analyzed

12

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 6 | hdcJK910 and wild-type photoreceptor outputs adapt to naturalistic stimulation with similar time courses. (A) Voltage responses of wild-type
and hdcJK910 photoreceptors to repeated 1 s long bright naturalistic light intensity time series (NS). (B) Change in the mean of 1 s long response over 40 s of
stimulation. Differences between mean wild-type and hdcJK910 responses were not statistically significant (p = 0.378 ± 0.035, 0.019 ≤ p ≤ 0.949, across 60
time-bins, two-tailed t-test). (C) Average waveforms of steady-state adapted 1 s long voltage responses. (D) Change in response modulation (Standard Deviation of
each 1 s long response) over 30 s of stimulation. Data for Mid light intensities are fitted with exponential curves: T wild−type = 2.83 ± 0.06 s, T hdc = 2.49 ± 0.07 s.
(E) Probability Density Functions (PDFs) of wild-type photoreceptor output in the 1st, 2nd, and 15th s of Bright naturalistic stimulation. (F) PDFs of hdcJK910
photoreceptor output in the 1st, 2nd, and 15th s of Bright naturalistic stimulation. (B–F) Mean ± SEM, nwild−type = 7, nhdc = 8. All recordings performed at t = 19◦ C.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

13

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

differences in their average signal-to-noise ratios and encoding
performances.

their steady-state adapted responses to the repeated naturalistic
stimuli (Figure 7A).
We found that their responses to Dim stimulation were of
similar size, but hdcJK910 photoreceptor output range (right, red)
contracted, while the wild-type range (left, black) expanded,
from Mid to Bright stimulation (Figure 7B), as partly suggested
by their adapting trends (Figures 6D–F). Accordingly, when
analyzed across the whole populations, hdcJK910 photoreceptors’
mean responses (signals) had wild-type-like power spectra to
Dim stimulation but carried significantly less power to Mid, at
low frequencies, (Figure 7C) and especially to Bright, over a
broad frequency range (Figure 7D). Here, these large differences
are plotted in a logarithmic scale to reveal the full spread of
their frequency components. Interestingly, though, noise power
spectra in hdcJK910 recordings, as the difference in frequency
components between the signal and the individual responses,
were similar to the wild-type noise spectra and remained largely
unaffected at the different stimulation intensities (Figure 7E).
Because the noise power spectrum largely represents the average
quantum bump’s frequency composition (Juusola and Hardie,
2001a; Song et al., 2012; Song and Juusola, 2014), wild-type
and hdcJK910 bumps (or samples) adapted to a similar size.
Therefore, the larger wild-type responses to Bright stimulation
(Figure 7B) simply comprised more samples. Together, these
findings predict that hdcJK910 R1–R6s’ encoding performance
would fall short of wild-type performance with brightening
illumination.
However, when we consider the outputs of individual
photoreceptors, hdcJK910 R1–R6s showed remarkably similar
signal-to-noise ratios (Figure 7F) to those of wild-type at the
three intensity levels tested and hence could communicate
comparable information rates, R (Figure 7G). To ensure
that these statistically insignificant differences were not errors
introduced by the extrapolation method for estimating the
information rates (Juusola and de Polavieja, 2003), we also
calculated the photoreceptors’ encoding performance using
Shannon’s estimation method (Shannon, 1948). In concordance
with previous reports (Juusola and de Polavieja, 2003; Song and
Juusola, 2014), this produced only slightly different R values
(Figure 8 difference 6.3–14.5%), supporting the comparative
relations shown in Figure 7G.
The apparent contradiction between the population averages
and individual responses originates from the large cell-tocell variations within each group. Average relative variations
(computed as SD/mean) of signal, noise and signal-to-noise
ratio in wild-type responses (for frequencies ≤ 40 Hz)
to Bright naturalistic stimulation were 32, 45, and 70%,
respectively. The corresponding values for hdcJK910 responses
were 53% (signal power), 78% (noise power) and 141%
(signal-to-noise ratio). Evidently, individual differences
were intensified by the mathematical relationship of (signal
power spectrum)/(noise power spectrum), resulting in
a remarkably larger relative variation in signal-to-noise
ratio than those in signal and noise power measurements.
Therefore, the statistically significant difference in the
average signal powers carried by hdcJK910 and wildtype responses was undermined, leading to insignificant

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

hdcJK910 Photoreceptors Reach Maximal
Encoding at Lower Intensities than
Wild-Type
To further assess how hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ operational
range differs from that of wild-type photoreceptors at daylight
intensities, we analyzed individual photoreceptors’ responses to
Mid and Bright naturalistic stimuli. These paired comparisons
reduced the cell-to-cell variation effects, making it easier to
quantify common photoreceptor output changes when the
stimulation is brightened by one log-unit.
We found that from Mid to Bright, wild-type photoreceptors’
operational range expanded by ∼15% (Figure 7B, black bars),
increasing signal power significantly at 8–22 Hz frequencies
(Figure 7H). As noise power stayed effectively unchanged
(Figure 7E, solid and dotted black lines), information transfer
rate estimates of all the tested wild-type photoreceptors (n = 7),
calculated by triple extrapolation method, improved by ∼10%
on average (Figure 7G, black bars). A larger R value increase
(∼25%) was computed by using Shannon’s estimation method
(Figure 8, black bars). Nonetheless, both estimation methods
indicated that this improvement was significant with a similar
p-value of ∼0.004.
Conversely, all hdcJK910 photoreceptors (n = 8) showed the
opposite trend with markedly smaller responses. However, their
∼16% response size reduction (Figure 7B, red bars) mostly
reflected decreased low frequency signal power (Figure 7I),
which thus carried little information. Hence, their encoding
performance did not lower significantly (Figures 7G and 8, red
bars). Altogether, hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ information transfer
rate estimates showed ∼5% reduction on average, with two out of
eight cells showing minor increases.

hdcJK910 Photoreceptors Lack Phasic
Modulation from Interneuron Feedback
The mean of the two independent information rate estimates
(Figures 7G and 8) for hdcJK910 photoreceptor output
(225.4 ± 21.5 bits/s) during Bright naturalistic stimulation
is ∼9% lower than that for the corresponding wild-type
output (248.3 ± 11.2 bits/s). This relative performance
difference is consistent with the hypothesis that each R1–R6
photoreceptor, within the same lamina cartridge, receives
additional information [synaptic quanta (sample) rate changes]
from interneuron feedback (Zheng et al., 2006). On balance,
interneuron feedback may carry higher information rates
than individual photoreceptor outputs because it integrates
information from six R1–R6s, which sample light changes
from the same small area. Such extra information returning to
individual photoreceptors in high signal-to-noise ratio stimulus
conditions (i.e., Mid and Bright) is predicted to be in the form of
phasic modulation (Zheng et al., 2006).
To test the interneuron feedback hypothesis and its
predictions decisively, we devised a new two part experiment.

14

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 7 | Steady-state-adapted hdcJK910 photoreceptor output to Mid and Bright naturalistic stimulation show less modulation but their
information transfer is remarkably similar to the wild-type. (A) Mean wild-type (black) and hdcJK910 (red) R1–R6 photoreceptors’ voltage response to a
repeated 1 s long naturalistic light intensity time series pattern of different brightness. (B) In Bright and Mid, hdcJK910 R1–R6 output had significantly less modulation
than the wild-type (Bright: SDwild−type = 6.85 ± 0.37 mV, SDhdc = 4.13 ± 0.27 mV, p = 4.427 × 10−5 , one-tailed t-test; Mid: SDwild−type = 5.93 ± 0.40 mV,
SDhdc = 4.92 ± 0.23 mV, p = 0.028, one-tailed t-test). In Bright, wild-type output modulation was the largest (p = 0.007, one-tailed paired t-test) while hdcJK910
modulation reduced in respect to Mid (p = 2.980 × 10−4 , one-tailed paired t-test). In Dim, hdcJK910 and wild-type outputs showed similar modulation (Dim:
SDwild−type = 2.16 ± 0.27 mV, SDhdc = 2.40 ± 0.23 mV, p = 0.520, two-tailed t-test). (C) In Mid, hdcJK910 signal had less power than the wild-type only in low
frequencies (f < 6Hz, p < 0.029, one-tailed t-test). In Dim, hdcJK910 and wild-type signal power spectra were similar. (D) In Bright, hdcJK910 R1–R6 output had less
signal power than the wild-type over a broad frequency range (f < 34Hz, p < 0.023, one-tailed t-test). (E) Noise power spectra of wild-type and hdcJK910
photoreceptor outputs were similar to all three tested brightness levels. Data in Dim condition is not shown for clarity. (F) Signal-to-noise ratios of wild-type and
hdcJK910 photoreceptor outputs were remarkably similar over the three tested brightness levels. Data for Mid stimulation are not shown for clarity. (G) Information
transfer rate estimates of wild-type and mutant photoreceptor outputs were remarkably similar (Dim: Rwild−type = 54.73 ± 3.67, Rhdc = 59.53 ± 4.23; Mid:
Rwild−type = 220.44 ± 10.75, Rhdc = 252.92 ± 17.86; Bright: Rwild−type = 240.40 ± 14.62, Rhdc = 240.64 ± 17.41, all in bits/second, p > 0.05, two-tailed t-test).
Wild-type photoreceptors showed higher information transfer rates in Bright stimulation than in Mid (p = 0.004, one-tailed paired t-test) while hdcJK910
photoreceptors encoded similar information rates in Mid and Bright (p = 0.138, two-tailed paired t-test). (H) For 8–24 Hz frequency range, wild-type photoreceptor
outputs to Bright naturalistic stimulation carried significantly more power than to Mid intensities (p < 0.001, paired one-tailed t-test). (I) hdcJK910 photoreceptor
outputs to Bright and Mid naturalistic stimulations had similar power spectra (p > 0.05, paired two-tailed t-test). (A–I): Mean ± SEM, nwild−type = 7, nhdc = 8. All
recordings performed at t = 19◦ C.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

15

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

Consequently, we reasoned, histamine uptake should also
recover the interneurons’ feedback modulation to photoreceptor
output. Indeed, we found that their voltage responses to the
sophisticated staircase light stimulus now closely resembled the
corresponding wild-type output (Figure 9A; their respective
SD changes were similar at all the tested brightness levels:
0.070 ≤ p ≤ 0.991, two-tailed t-test). In line with the feedback
hypothesis, their Bright and Mid sections carried characteristic
phasic modulation (Figure 9E), with broadly comparable
stimulus power distributions to the wild-type counterparts
(cf. Figure 9C). Their dissimilarities mainly reflected noise
and natural variability in fewer hdcJK910 recordings (n = 3
flies) as the corresponding histamine-rescued hdcJK910 power
spectra did not differ statistically from the wild-type up to
100 Hz (p >>0.05, two-tailed t-test). In further agreement,
histamine-rescue also lowered the resting potentials of hdcJK910
photoreceptors to the wild-type level, indicating tonic excitatory
interneuron feedback as the likely cause for their initial
difference.
Finally, we used the basic test assays to quantify the rescued
mutants’ vision. Their ERG (Figure 9F) and optomotor responses
(Figure 9G) approached the wild-type dynamics, indicating
that these flies would now see normally, or near-normally; cf.
Figures 2B,C.
The close correspondence between the experiments
(histamine-rescue results) and the theory (predictions of
the interneuron feedback hypothesis) allows us to conclude that
dynamic network regulation is critical for normal Drosophila
photoreceptor function and vision.

FIGURE 8 | hdcJK910 and wild-type R1–R6 photoreceptors’ Information
transfer rates calculated by Shannon’s estimation method. The cells’
signaling performance to the same naturalistic stimulation was estimated at
different intensity levels. Dim: Rwild−type = 47.00 ± 8.12, Rhdc = 53.88 ± 7.93;
Mid: Rwild−type = 205.00 ± 14.78, Rhdc = 220.38 ± 23.71; Bright:
Rwild−type = 256.29 ± 22.98, Rhdc = 210.25 ± 30.05, all in bits/second.
Wild-type photoreceptors showed higher information transfer rates in Bright
stimulation than in Mid (p = 0.004, paired one-tailed t-test). Mean ± SEM,
nwild−type = 7, nhdc = 8. All recordings were performed at t = 19◦ C.

In the first part, we recorded wild-type and hdcJK910 R1–R6
photoreceptor outputs to a repeated naturalistic light intensity
time series that intensified and weakened in logarithmic steps as
a staircase function (Figures 9A,B, respectively). The difference
in the recordings showed unambiguously that hdcJK910 R1–R6
photoreceptor output to Mid and Bright stimulation contained
less modulation than the wild-type, irrespective of whether the
stimuli followed darkness or different brightness modulation
(Bright1, Mid1, Dim1, Dim2, Mid2, Bright2). Thus, these data
confirmed our observations and analyses for specific stimuli
(Figures 6 and 7), generalizing their conclusions over a broad
dynamic light intensity range. The recordings also confirmed
that hdcJK910 photoreceptors are more depolarized than the wildtype in darkness (cf. Figure 5H); here, showing ∼5.3 mV higher
resting potential (p = 0.013) prior light stimulation – in support
of them receiving tonic enhanced interneuron feedback.
But most importantly, the recordings enabled us to
systematically quantify how the frequency content of the
additional modulation in the wild-type photoreceptor output
changed during light intensity transitions in naturalistic
stimulation. This is shown in Figure 9C as the difference in
the corresponding power spectra of wild-type and hdcJK910
photoreceptor outputs for the first Bright, Mid, and Dim
stimulus sections (cf. Figures 9A,B). As predicted for
high signal-to-noise ratio light conditions, the modulation
added phasic components, seen as a band-passing frequency
distribution with the peak at 10 Hz, over hdcJK910 photoreceptor
output frequency range during Mid and Bright stimulation.
However, during low signal-to-noise ratio Dim stimulation,
its contribution was much less. Thus, extra modulation
in wild-type R1–R6 output comes from interneuron
feedback.
In the second part of the experiment, we recorded R1–
R6 photoreceptor outputs in the histamine-rescued hdcJK910
mutants (Figure 9D). The synaptic feedforward function of
photoreceptor-interneuron synapses in hdcJK910 mutants were
rescued by feeding them with histamine (Melzig et al., 1998).

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

DISCUSSION
Eyes must continuously sample information about the world
and adapt to its similarities and differences to see well.
While facing physical encoding constraints and vast intensity
changes in natural environments, network adaptation to
prevailing light conditions is expected to improve the eyes’
neural representation of visual scenes (neural images), and
so the efficiency and performance of vision (Laughlin, 1981;
Brenner et al., 2000; Nikolaev et al., 2009; Zheng et al.,
2009). In this study, we have systematically investigated
how dynamic network adaptation, which in eye circuits
plays a major role in maintaining time-dependent visual
capabilities, affects Drosophila’s photoreceptor function.
This was done by comparing intracellular voltage responses
of hdcJK910 photoreceptors, which owing to their blocked
feedforward pathway cannot receive dynamic feedback
from interneurons, to those of wild-type photoreceptors,
which receive normal interneuron feedback. We found
that a lack of synaptic feedforward transmission causes
both dynamic and homeostatic changes in photoreceptors’
signaling properties and performance, and characterized these
changes. Finally, we showed that rescuing photoreceptors’
feedforward pathway restores feedback signals, and consequently
photoreceptor function and fly vision returns to normal.
Our findings demonstrate the importance of interneuron

16

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 9 | Interneuron feedback accentuates modulation in R1–R6 photoreceptor output. (A) Voltage responses of wild-type photoreceptors to up- and
down-stepped logarithmic naturalistic light changes show strong modulation during Bright, Mid and Dim intensities. Mean ± SEM, n = 8 cells. To ease comparison,
zero ordinate marks the cell’s average resting potential in darkness. (B) hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ responses to the same stimulus exhibit reduced modulation during
Bright and Mid intensities; Mean ± SEM shown, n = 15 cells. Testing hypotheses that mean wild-type modulation 6= mean hdcJK910 modulation: Bright 1
(p = 1.785 × 10−8 ); Mid 1 (p = 3.357 × 10−7 ); Dim 1 (p = 0.676); Dim 2 (p = 0.292); Mid 2 (p = 9.447 × 10−9 ); Bright 2 (p = 6.416 × 10−10 ). On average, the
cell’s resting potential was 5.3 mV higher than in the wild-type (red arrows between dotted lines, p = 0.013, one-tailed t-test). (C) The difference in the corresponding
wild-type (normal feedback) and hdcJK910 (only tonic feedback) response power spectra suggests that the normal interneuron feedback accentuates R1–R6 output,
phasically modulating it over 2–44 Hz frequency range during Mid and Bright stimulation. The corresponding wild-type power spectra (feedback modulation) differed
from the hdcJK910 power spectra during Bright 1: 1–36 Hz (4.661 × 10−7 < p < 0.01) and 36–44 Hz (0.019 < p < 0.05) and Mid 1 stimuli: 1–18 Hz
(1.051 × 10−6 < p < 0.015). (D) Histamine uptake rescues modulation in R1–R6 photoreceptor output in hdcJK910 mutants to wild-type levels; Mean ± SEM
shown, n = 3 cells. Testing hypotheses that mean hdcJK910 rescue modulation 6= mean hdcJK910 modulation in Bright 1 (p = 9.966 × 10−7 ); Mid 1
(p = 1.593 × 10−4 ); Dim 1 (p = 0.514); Dim 2 (p = 0.693); Mid 2 (p = 2.051 × 10−5 ); Bright 2 (p = 5.468 × 10−6 ). The rescued cells’ resting potentials differed
from the non-rescued cells (p = 0.021) but not from the wild-type (p = 0.384). (E) Histamine-rescue recovers hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ output modulation power
spectra to near wild-type levels; cf. (C). The rescued power spectra (with feedback modulation) differ from the hdcJK910 power spectra during Bright 1: 1–34 Hz
(9.399 × 10−7 < p < 0.008) and 36 Hz (p = 0.0159) and Mid 1 stimuli: 1–14 Hz (8.425 × 10−6 < p < 0.005). (F) Histamine uptake rescues on- and off-transients
in hdcJK910 ERG, indicating that the mutants see. For the given stimulus, the mutants fed on histamine, their ERG’s slow photoreceptor component differs from that
of the mutants on normal diet (ERG PCrescue = 5.9 ± 1.7 mV, ERG PChdc = 3.6 ± 1.0 mV; mean ± SD, p = 0.006, nrescue = 4, nhdc = 7 flies). However, the rescued
photoreceptor component still does not fully match the wild-type ERG (ERG PCwild−type = 8.2 ± 1.8 mV; mean ± SD, p = 0.034, nwild−type = 8 flies); cf. Figure 2B.
(G) Histamine uptake rescues normal optomotor behavior in hdcJK910 mutants, as tested in the Drosophila flight simulator system to left and right rotating panoramic
stripe patterns; cf. Figure 2C. The maximum optomotor responses of rescued hdcJK910 mutants are wild-type-like (ORrescue = 1.9 ± 0.2 a.u.,
ORwild−type = 2.0 ± 0.2 a.u., p = 0.715, nrescue = 5, nwild−type = 7 flies). (A–G) Mean ± SEM, two-tailed t-test, unless stated otherwise. (A,B,D): Modulation was
the average standard deviation in each response segment, estimated from five consecutive 2 s samples: 11–20 s from each Bright, Mid, and Dim step onward.
These averages for each corresponding Dim, Mid and Bright sections were collected across the tested fly populations and compared statistically.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

17

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

phasically modulates their rising and decaying responses
(cf. Figure 9C), in particular to bright stimulation
(Figure 10A). This modulation, which due to pooling
six photoreceptor signals in the interneurons (neural
Excitatory Feedback Hypothesis
superposition) has a higher information content than that
JK910
of a single photoreceptor (Figure 10D; Zheng et al., 2006),
Predicts hdc
R1–R6s’ Distinctive
accentuates intensity differences in responses over time
Response Characteristics
(Figures 10B,C). In darkness, tonic excitatory feedback
Our results are consistent with the excitatory interneuron
to photoreceptors strengthens because the interneurons
feedback hypothesis (Zheng et al., 2006, 2009; Nikolaev
receive less histamine, and so are more depolarized than in
et al., 2009) and the lamina interneurons’ neurotransmitter
light. Hence, photoreceptors’ resting potentials are more
immunohistochemistry (Kolodziejczyk et al., 2008; Raghu and
depolarized than without the feedback (i).
Borst, 2011; Takemura et al., 2011; Hu et al., 2015). Most critically,
(iii)
When
the sign-inverting/hyperpolarizing feedforward transhdcJK910 photoreceptors’ membrane properties in darkness and
mission from photoreceptors is reduced in a hypomorphic
responses to bright stimuli indicate that the major interneuron
mutant (ortP306 ) of the postsynaptic histamine receptor,
feedback to Drosophila photoreceptors cannot be inhibitory.
interneurons become more depolarized (Zheng et al.,
Missing inhibitory feedback would increase modulation in
2006). In return, their modulation releases more excitatory
JK910
hdc
photoreceptor output, but we see the opposite
neurotransmitters onto photoreceptor axon terminals than
(Figures 7–9). Although feedback inhibition undoubtedly plays
in the wild-type situation (Figures 10A–D; iii vs. ii). In
an important role in modulating signals within and between
ortP306 mutants with weaker feedforward, the enhanced
neural cartridges, where it mediates lateral inhibition as witnessed
synaptic feedback signals drive photoreceptors to larger
by Ca2+ -imaging at the medulla level (Freifeld et al., 2013), its
responses (Figure 10C) with faster kinetics (Figure 10B);
contribution to shaping time-dependent photoreceptor output
for example, ortP306 output to the bright pulse peaks and
seems minute at best.
decays ∼40% faster than in the wild-type. The enhanced
To put our findings in the context of network processing,
interneuron feedback also carries abnormal high-frequency
we first illustrate with a schematic photoreceptor output
modulation (likely resulting from accelerated histaminechart (Figure 10) how different experimental observations
receptor kinetics), which enriches photoreceptors’ signal
match the key predictions of the excitatory feedback
content (Zheng et al., 2006) (Figure 10D).
model, at the tested conditions of: (i) abolished synaptic
(iv) In hdcJK910 mutants, the completely blocked feedforward
contacts; (ii) normal contacts; (iii) blocked feedforward;
pathway probably elevates LMCs and amacrine cells to even
and (iv) reduced feedforward. In essence, the model states
higher depolarized levels than those of ortP306 and ebony.
that in vivo R1–R6 photoreceptor output to light changes
Accordingly, hdcJK910 photoreceptors receive excessive
carries two main components: the phototransduction
excitatory feedback. Unlike in the wild-type (or ortP306 ),
response and the excitatory feedback response from
however, this feedback signal lacks modulation and tonically
interneurons.
depolarizes hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ resting potentials above
the wild-type values (Figure 10A; iv vs. ii), as was seen in
(i) When photoreceptors are severed from the synaptic
the recordings (Figures 5G and 9B). Nonetheless, because
network in dissociated ommatidia (Figure 10A) and
the hdcJK910 interneurons are effectively blind, their feedback
voltage-clamped, their response is the phototransduction
signals cannot improve the quality of photoreceptor output –
response (cf. Figure 5C, which shows the corresponding
its amplitude or frequency representations – to light changes
LIC). Its amplitude (Figure 10B) and duration (Figure 10C)
(Figure 10D).
follow adaptive changes in light information sampling
by 30,000 microvilli and concurrent membrane filtering
Additionally, other intrinsic (homeostatic) mechanisms are
(Figure 10D; Song et al., 2012; Hardie and Juusola,
2015). Without the depolarizing feedback conductances, likely to compensate for these extrinsic changes and thus
the photoreceptors’ resting potentials in darkness convert hdcJK910 photoreceptors into a distinctive regime with
settle to low values, as hyperpolarized by their strong unique response characteristics (Figures 10B,C), rather than
intrinsic K+ -conductances (Hardie, 1991a; Vähäsöyrinki mimicking or exacerbating those observed in ortP306 and
et al., 2006). This was earlier confirmed in vivo by ebony mutants (Zheng et al., 2006). For instance, rebalancing
continuous intracellular photoreceptor recordings in of intrinsic ion channels (Vähäsöyrinki et al., 2006) may
shibireTS1 mutants (Zheng et al., 2006). Warming restore their membrane input resistance to wild-type levels
them >28◦ C silenced synaptic transmission between in darkness (Figure 5F), while the cells’ lower membrane
photoreceptors and interneurons. With the feedback capacitance (Figure 5D) may accelerate the conduction of their
ceasing, the photoreceptors swiftly hyperpolarized to slower macroscopic LICs (Figure 5C). Such possible synergistic
15–20 mV lower potentials than at 18◦ C, where the feedback contributions were evidenced under brief light stimulation
by the equally fast rise times of the hdcJK910 and wildfunctioned normally.
(ii) When photoreceptors are normally engaged in the type photoreceptors’ voltage responses to brief light pulses
synaptic network, excitatory interneuron feedback (Figure 3C).
feedback in regulating the quality of photoreceptor output
under changing light conditions and in robustness of
vision.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

18

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

FIGURE 10 | Dynamic network regulation on photoreceptor function. Schematic and qualitative representation of how excitatory interneuron feedback shapes
voltage responses of dark-adapted R1–R6 photoreceptors to a brief bright pulse. (A) Voltage output: (i), without synaptic contacts (WT, continuous line, and
hdcJK910 , dotted line, of ex vivo dissociated photoreceptors); (ii), of wild-type photoreceptors; (iii), of ortP306 photoreceptors, which receive enhanced excitatory
dynamic interneuron feedback (modulation); (iv), of hdcJK910 photoreceptors. The down-arrows (inhibitory histaminergic feedforward) and up-arrows (excitatory
synaptic feedback from interneurons) indicate their relative contributions to photoreceptor output regulation; e.g., there is only tonic excitatory interneuron feedback
to hdcJK910 photoreceptors. (B) Effect of different feedback conditions on the response size. (C) Effect of different feedback conditions on the response speed.
(D) Effect of different feedback conditions on the photoreceptors’ information transfer rate, R.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

19

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

high resting potentials (Figure 5C), are therefore the probable
reasons for the weakened responses observed in hdcJK910
photoreceptors.
The evidence about why the suggested (but never shown)
histamine autoreceptors (Hardie et al., 1988) in R1–R6 terminals
are unlikely to contribute to these and our previous findings is
discussed in (Zheng et al., 2006).

hdcJK910 Photoreceptors’ Compromised
Operational Range
Compared to wild-type flies and the synaptic mutants, which
have either faulty histamine receptors (ortP306 ) or histamine
recycling (ebony; Zheng et al., 2006), the most notable
characteristic of hdcJK910 photoreceptors is their reduced
sensitivity to bright and prolonged light stimuli. hdcJK910
R1–R6s produced smaller responses to long light pulses
(Figure 4), with hdcJK910 ERGs consistently showing smaller
photoreceptor components (Figures 2B,C). Furthermore, the
amplitude distribution (or modulation) of their responses
contracted during Bright naturalistic stimulation (Figures 6E,F
and 7A,B), which accordingly is reflected in their lower signal
power spectra (Figures 7C,D). With their output beginning
to stall at Mid intensities (Figures 7B and 9D), hdcJK910
photoreceptors generated lower information rates to Bright
naturalistic stimulation (6/8 cells; Figures 7G and 8). Together,
these results imply that hdcJK910 photoreceptors have a narrower
operational range: with brightening stimulation, their voltage
responses reach maximum amplitude and information transfer
rates before wild-type photoreceptors and their encoding
performance begins to saturate earlier, because they lack
the additional synaptic information component from the
network.

Histamine-Uptake Rescues hdcJK910
Photoreceptor Output to Normal
Wild-Type Dynamics
The theoretical considerations above were strongly supported
experimentally by the recovery of photoreceptor function in
hdcJK910 mutants, fed on histamine-rich diet, thereby excluding
any unforeseen pleiotropic or developmental effects of the
hdcJK910 mutation. The rescued hdcJK910 photoreceptors showed
normal voltage output with wild-type-like modulation to Bright
and Mid naturalistic stimulation. Intriguingly, this recovered
modulation carried band-pass frequency distribution, which
during with bright stimulation, output power peaked at 10 Hz
(Figure 9E) – similar to the LMC output’s frequency distribution
(Zheng et al., 2009), suggesting that it was largely phasic and came
from the interneurons. The histamine-rescue further lowered
hdcJK910 photoreceptors’ resting potentials to wild-type values
(Figure 9D), implying that the probable excitatory overload,
which these cells received from interneuron feedback, returned
to its normal range when the interneurons started functioning
normally (Figure 9F), as judged from their ERGs’ normal-like onand off-transients.

Abnormal Feedback Affects hdcJK910
Photoreceptor Output
We cannot rule out other defects in hdcJK910 phototransduction
cascade, which might affect their light-induced responses.
However, ex vivo properties of mutant photoreceptors
cannot explain their in vivo characteristics. For example,
the slightly lengthier macroscopic LICs and wild-type-like
somatic membrane conductances found in dissociated hdcJK910
photoreceptors do not directly result in their in vivo counterpart’s
contracted responses to long light pulses and naturalistic stimuli.
Therefore, the detrimental features of mutant photoreceptor
outputs are largely attributable to the abnormal feedback
signals from their interneurons. As demonstrated in (Zheng
et al., 2006), feedforward and feedback signals dynamically
contribute to photoreceptor and interneuron outputs. When
the probability of light saturation is low, the stronger synaptic
transmission in both pathways helps to amplify their response
amplitudes. Moreover, since each lamina cartridge receives
input from six different photoreceptors, which sample light
from a small area in space (Meinertzhagen and O’Neil,
1991), the signal-to-noise ratios of L1–L3s’ and probably ACs’
voltage responses are higher than those of photoreceptors’
(Juusola et al., 1995; Zheng et al., 2006). In return, the
high quality interneuron feedback – especially during high
signal-to-noise ratio stimulation (Bright and Mid) – helps to
improve photoreceptor signal quality (Zheng et al., 2006). When
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing outputs of photoreceptors and
interneurons, respectively, are large, low-frequency synaptic
loads should be reduced to prevent signal saturation in exchange
of increasing high-frequency synaptic load (phasic signals).
Lacking these dynamic mechanisms, along with the artificially

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

CONCLUSION
Photoreceptor voltage output is shaped by a complex interaction
between the phototransduction current, voltage-sensitive
membrane and synaptic feedback. How photoreceptors receive,
process, and transmit information depends upon how these
different components interact, and the appropriate balance
between them is critical for normal vision. In this article, we
showed that lack of synaptic feedforward transmission to visual
interneurons in hdcJK910 mutant causes both dynamic and
homeostatic changes in Drosophila photoreceptors’ signaling
properties and performance, and quantified these changes over
a broad light intensity range. Our results imply that synaptic
feedback to photoreceptors carries mostly excitatory phasic
modulation, which neurally accentuates intensity differences in
light stimulation, and highlight the general importance of local
interneurons as dynamic regulators of photoreceptor function
and normal vision.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AD, UF, RCH, and MJ designed research; AD, UF, SD, XL, MB,
RCH, and MJ performed research; AD, RCH, and MJ analyzed
data; AD and MJ wrote the paper.

20

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

BB/M009564/1 to MJ, and BB/M007006/1 for RCH, The
University of Sheffield provided Ph.D. fellowships to AD, UF,
and SD.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the State Key Laboratory of
Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning open research fund to
MJ, Natural Science Foundation of China Project 30810103906
to MJ, Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation Fellowship to
MJ, Leverhulme Trust Grant RPG-2012-567 to MJ, and
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
Grants BB/F012071/1, BB/D001900/1, BB/H013849/1, and

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank A. Nikolaev, A. Lin and personnel of the MJ laboratory
for discussions and comments.

REFERENCES

Henderson, S. R., Reuss, H., and Hardie, R. C. (2000). Single photon
responses in Drosophila photoreceptors and their regulation by
Ca2+. J. Physiol. Lon. 524, 179–194. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.
00179.x
Hu, W., Wang, T. T., Wang, X., and Han, J. H. (2015). I-h channels control
feedback regulation from amacrine cells to photoreceptors. PLoS Biol.
13:e1002115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002115
Jackman, S. L., Babai, N., Chambers, J. J., Thoreson, W. B., and Kramer, R. H.
(2011). A positive feedback synapse from retinal horizontal cells to cone
photoreceptors. PLoS Biol. 9:e1001057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001057
Juusola, M., and de Polavieja, G. G. (2003). The rate of information transfer of
naturalistic stimulation by graded potentials. J. Gen. Physiol. 122, 191–206. doi:
10.1085/jgp.200308824
Juusola, M., and Hardie, R. C. (2001a). Light adaptation in Drosophila
photoreceptors: I. Response dynamics and signaling efficiency at 25 degrees C.
J. Gen. Physiol. 117, 3–25. doi: 10.1085/jgp.117.1.3
Juusola, M., and Hardie, R. C. (2001b). Light adaptation in Drosophila
photoreceptors: II. Rising temperature increases the bandwidth of reliable
signaling. J. Gen. Physiol. 117, 27–41. doi: 10.1085/jgp.117.1.27
Juusola, M., Kouvalainen, E., Järvilehto, M., and Weckström, M. (1994).
Contrast gain, signal-to-noise ratio, and linearity in light-adapted blowfly
photoreceptors. J. Gen. Physiol. 104, 593–621. doi: 10.1085/jgp.104.3.593
Juusola, M., Uusitalo, R. O., and Weckstrom, M. (1995). Transfer of graded
potentials at the photoreceptor interneuron synapse. J. Gen. Physiol. 105,
117–148. doi: 10.1085/jgp.105.1.117
Kolodziejczyk, A., Sun, X. J., Meinertzhagen, I. A., and Nässel, D. R.
(2008). Glutamate, GABA and acetylcholine signaling components in
the lamina of the Drosophila visual system. PLoS ONE 3:e2110. doi:
10.1371/Journal.Pone.0002110
Laughlin, S. (1981). A simple coding procedure enhances a neurons information
capacity. Z. Fur Naturforschung C-A J. Biosci. 36, 910–912.
Laughlin, S. B., Howard, J., and Blakeslee, B. (1987). Synaptic limitations to contrast
coding in the retina of the blowfly Calliphora. Proc. R. Soc. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 231,
437–467. doi: 10.1098/rspb.1987.0054
Meinertzhagen, I. A., and O’Neil, S. D. (1991). Synaptic organization of columnar
elements in the lamina of the wild-type in Drosophila-melanogaster. J. Compar.
Neurol. 305, 232–263. doi: 10.1002/cne.903050206
Melzig, J., Buchner, S., Wiebel, F., Wolf, R., Burg, M., Pak, W. L., et al.
(1996). Genetic depletion of histamine from the nervous system of Drosophila
eliminates specific visual and mechanosensory behavior. J. Compar. Physiol.
A-Sen. Neural Behav. Physiol. 179, 763–773.
Melzig, J., Burg, M., Gruhn, M., Pak, W. L., and Buchner, E. (1998). Selective
histamine uptake rescues photo- and mechanoreceptor function of histidine
decarboxylase-deficient Drosophila mutant. J. Neurosci. 18, 7160–7166.
Nikolaev, A., Zheng, L., Wardill, T. J., O’Kane, C. J., de Polavieja, G. G., and
Juusola, M. (2009). Network adaptation improves temporal representation of
naturalistic stimuli in Drosophila eye: II mechanisms. PLoS ONE 4:e4306. doi:
10.1371/Journal.Pone.0004306
Raghu, S. V., and Borst, A. (2011). Candidate glutamatergic neurons in the visual
system of Drosophila. PLoS ONE 6:e19472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019472
Reynolds, E. S. (1963). Use of lead citrate at high ph as an electron-opaque stain in
electron microscopy. J. Cell Biol. 17, 208–212. doi: 10.1083/Jcb.17.1.208
Rivera-Alba, M., Vitaladevuni, S. N., Mischenko, Y., Lu, Z. Y., Takemura, S. Y.,
Scheffer, L., et al. (2011). Wiring economy and volume exclusion determine

Abou Tayoun, A. N., Li, X. F., Chu, B., Hardie, R. C., Juusola, M., and Dolph,
P. J. (2011). The Drosophila SK channel (dSK) contributes to photoreceptor
performance by mediating sensitivity control at the first visual network.
J. Neurosci. 31, 13897–13910. doi: 10.1523/Jneurosci.3134-11.2011
Brenner, N., Bialek, W., and van Steveninck, R. D. (2000). Adaptive rescaling
maximizes information transmission. Neuron 26, 695–702. doi: 10.1016/S08966273(00)81205-2
Burg, M. G., Sarthy, P. V., Koliantz, G., and Pak, W. L. (1993). Genetic and
molecular-identification of a Drosophila histidine-decarboxylase gene required
in photoreceptor transmitter synthesis. Embo J. 12, 911–919.
Burkhardt, D. A. (1993). synaptic feedback, depolarization, and color
opponency in cone photoreceptors. Vis. Neurosci. 10, 981–989. doi:
10.1017/S0952523800010087
Coombe, P. E. (1986). The large monopolar cells L1 and L2 are responsible for erg
transients in Drosophila. J. Compar. Physiol. A-Sens. Neural Behav. Physiol. 159,
655–665. doi: 10.1007/Bf00612038
Freifeld, L., Clark, D. A., Schnitzer, M. J., Horowitz, M. A., and Clandinin,
T. R. (2013). GABAergic lateral interactions tune the early stages of visual
processing in Drosophila. Neuron 78, 1075–1089. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.
04.024
Friederich, U., Coca, D., Billings, S., and Juusola, M. (2009). Data modelling for
analysis of adaptive changes in fly photoreceptors. Neur. Inform. Process. Proc.
5863, 34–48.
Gonzalez-Bellido, P. T., Wardill, T. J., Kostyleva, R., Meinertzhagen, I. A., and
Juusola, M. (2009). Overexpressing temperature-sensitive dynamin decelerates
phototransduction and bundles microtubules in Drosophila photoreceptors.
J. Neurosci. 29, 14199–14210. doi: 10.1523/Jneurosci.2873-09.2009
Hardie, R. C. (1987). Is histamine a neurotransmitter in insect photoreceptors.
J. Compar. Physiol. A-Sens. Neur. Behav. Physiol. 161, 201–213. doi:
10.1007/Bf00615241
Hardie, R. C. (1989). A histamine-activated chloride channel involved in
neurotransmission at a photoreceptor synapse. Nature 339, 704–706. doi:
10.1038/339704a0
Hardie, R. C. (1991a). Voltage-sensitive potassium channels in Drosophila
photoreceptors. J. Neurosci. 11, 3079–3095.
Hardie, R. C. (1991b). Whole-cell recordings of the light-induced current in
dissociated Drosophila photoreceptors - evidence for feedback by calcium
permeating the light-sensitive channels. Proc. R. Soc. B-Biol. Sci. 245, 203–210.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1991.0110
Hardie, R. C., and Juusola, M. (2015). Phototransduction in Drosophila. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 34, 37–45. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.01.008
Hardie, R. C., Laughlin, S. B., and Osorio, D. (1988). “Early visual processing in the
compound eye: physiology and pharmacology of the retina-lamina projection
in the fly,” in Neurobiology of Sensory Systems, eds R. Singh and N. Strausfeld
(New York, NY: Plenum Press), 23–42.
Hardie, R. C., Martin, F., Cochrane, G. W., Juusola, M., Georgiev, P.,
and Raghu, P. (2002). Molecular basis of amplification in Drosophila
phototransduction: roles for G protein, phospholipase C, and
diacylglycerol kinase. Neuron 36, 689–701. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)
01048-6
Heisenberg, M. (1971). Separation of receptor and lamina potentials in
electroretinogram of normal and mutant Drosophila. J. Exp. Biol. 55, 85–100.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

21

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

Dau et al.

Network Regulation of Photoreceptor Function

neuronal placement in the Drosophila brain. Curr. Biol. 21, 2000–2005. doi:
10.1016/j.cub.2011.10.022
Sarthy, P. V. (1991). Histamine - a neurotransmitter candidate for
Drosophila photoreceptors. J. Neurochem. 57, 1757–1768. doi:
10.1111/j.1471-4159.1991.tb06378.x
Satoh, A. K., Xia, H., Yan, L., Liu, C. H., Hardie, R. C., and Ready, D. F.
(2010). Arrestin translocation is stoichiometric to rhodopsin isomerization and
accelerated by phototransduction in Drosophila photoreceptors. Neuron 67,
997–1008. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.024
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell Syst. Tech.
J. 27, 623–656. doi: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb00917.x
Shaw, S. R., Frohlich, A., and Meinertzhagen, I. A. (1989). Direct connections
between the R7/8 and R1-6 photoreceptor subsystems in the dipteran visualsystem. Cell Tissue Res. 257, 295–302. doi: 10.1007/Bf00261833
Song, Z., and Juusola, M. (2014). Refractory sampling links efficiency and costs
of sensory encoding to stimulus statistics. J. Neurosci. 34, 7216–7237. doi:
10.1523/Jneurosci.4463-13.2014
Song, Z., Postma, M., Billings, S. A., Coca, D., Hardie, R. C., and Juusola, M. (2012).
Stochastic, adaptive sampling of information by microvilli in fly photoreceptors.
Curr. Biol. 22, 1371–1380. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.05.047
Sterling, P. (1983). Microcircuitry of the cat retina. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 6,
149–185. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ne.06.030183.001053
Takemura, S. Y., Karuppudurai, T., Ting, C. Y., Lu, Z. Y., Lee, C. H., and
Meinertzhagen, I. A. (2011). Cholinergic circuits integrate neighboring visual
signals in a Drosophila motion detection pathway. Curr. Biol. 21, 2077–2084.
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.10.053
Tang, S. M., and Guo, A. (2001). Choice behavior of Drosophila facing
contradictory visual cues. Science 294, 1543–1547. doi: 10.1126/science.10
58237
Thoreson, W. B., Babai, N., and Bartoletti, T. M. (2008). Feedback from horizontal
cells to rod Photoreceptors in vertebrate retina. J. Neurosci. 28, 5691–5695. doi:
10.1523/Jneurosci.0403-08.2008
Thoreson, W. B., and Mangel, S. C. (2012). Lateral interactions in the outer retina.
Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 31, 407–441. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2012.04.003
Uusitalo, R. O., Juusola, M., Kouvalainen, E., and Weckstrom, M. (1995a).
Tonic transmitter release in a graded potential synapse. J. Neurophysiol. 74,
470–473.

Frontiers in Neural Circuits | www.frontiersin.org

Uusitalo, R. O., Juusola, M., and Weckstrom, M. (1995b). Graded responses
and spiking properties of identified first-order visual interneurons of the fly
compound eye. J. Neurophysiol. 73, 1782–1792.
Vähäsöyrinki, M., Niven, J. E., Hardie, R. C., Weckström, M., and Juusola, M.
(2006). Robustness of neural coding in Drosophila photoreceptors in the
absence of slow delayed rectifier K+ channels. J. Neurosci. 26, 2652–2660. doi:
10.1523/Jneurosci.3316-05.2006
van Hateren, J. H. (1997). Processing of natural time series of intensities by the
visual system of the blowfly. Vision Res. 37, 3407–3416. doi: 10.1016/S00426989(97)00105-3
van Hateren, J. H., and Snippe, H. P. (2001). Information theoretical evaluation of
parametric models of gain control in blowfly photoreceptor cells. Vision Res. 41,
1851–1865. doi: 10.1016/S0042-6989(01)00052-9
Wardill, T. J., List, O., Li, X. F., Dongre, S., McCulloch, M., Ting, C. Y.,
et al. (2012). Multiple spectral inputs improve motion discrimination in
the Drosophila visual system. Science 336, 925–931. doi: 10.1126/science.
1215317
Zheng, L., Nikolaev, A., Wardill, T. J., O’Kane, C. J., de Polavieja, G. G., and
Juusola, M. (2009). Network adaptation improves temporal representation of
naturalistic stimuli in Drosophila eye: I dynamics. PLoS ONE 4:e4307. doi:
10.1371/Journal.Pone.0004307
Zheng, L., Polavieja, G. G., Wolfram, V., Asyali, M. H., Hardie, R. C., and
Juusola, M. (2006). Feedback network controls photoreceptor output at the
layer of first visual synapses in Drosophila. J. Gen. Physiol. 127, 495–510. doi:
10.1085/jgp.200509470
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Dau, Friederich, Dongre, Li, Bollepalli, Hardie and Juusola. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.

22

March 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 19

